a course inmachine learninghal daum iii copyright hal daum iii published by todo todo. first printing september for my students and teachers. often the same. table of contents about this book decision trees geometry and nearest neighbors the perceptron practical issues beyond binary classification linear models probabilistic modeling neural networks kernel methods learning theory ensemble methods efficient learning unsupervised learning expectation maximization semi-supervised learning graphical models online learning structured learning tasks bayesian learning code and datasets notation bibliography index about this book machine learning is a broad and fascinating field. it has been called one of the attractive fields to work it has applications in an incredibly wide variety of application areas from medicine to advertising from military to pedestrian. its importance is likely to grow as more and more areas turn to it as a way of dealing with the massive amounts of data available. how to use this book why another textbook? mitchell the purpose of this book is to provide a gentle and pedagogically organized introduction to the field. this is in contrast to most existing machine learning texts which tend to organize things topically rather than pedagogically exception is mitchell s but unfortunately that is getting more and more outdated. this makes sense for researchers in the field but less sense for learners. a second goal of this book is to provide a view of machine learning that focuses on ideas and models not on math. it is not possible even advisable to avoid math. but math should be there to aid understanding not hinder it. finally this book attempts to have minimal dependencies so that one can fairly easily pick and choose chapters to read. when dependencies exist they are listed at the start of the chapter as well as the list of dependencies at the end of this chapter. the audience of this book is anyone who knows differential calculus and discrete math and can program reasonably well. little bit of linear algebra and probability will not hurt. an undergraduate in their fourth or fifth semester should be fully capable of understanding this material. however it should also be suitable for first year graduate students perhaps at a slightly faster pace. organization and auxilary material there is an associated web page which contains an online copy of this book as well as associated code and data. it also contains errate. for instructors there is the ability to get a solutions manual. this book is suitable for a single-semester undergraduate course graduate course or two semester course the latter supplemented with readings decided upon by the instructor. here are suggested course plans for the first two courses a year-long course could be obtained simply by covering the entire book. acknowledgements decision trees learning objectives explain the difference between memorization and generalization. define inductive bias and recog nize the role of inductive bias in learning. take a concrete task and cast it as a learning problem with a formal notion of input space features output space generating distribution and loss function. illustrate how regularization trades off between underfitting and overfitting. evaluate whether a use of test data is cheating or not. dependencies none. the words printed here are concepts. you must go through the experiences. carl frederick at a basic level machine learning is about predicting the future based on the past. for instance you might wish to predict how much a user alice will like a movie that she hasn t seen based on her ratings of movies that she has seen. this means making informed guesses about some unobserved property of some object based on observed properties of that object. the first question we ll ask is what does it mean to learn? in order to develop learning machines we must know what learning actually means and how to determine success failure. you ll see this question answered in a very limited learning setting which will be progressively loosened and adapted throughout the rest of this book. for concreteness our focus will be on a very simple model of learning called a decision tree. vignette alice decides which classes to take todo what does it mean to learn? alice has just begun taking a course on machine learning. she knows that at the end of the course she will be expected to have learned all about this topic. a common way of gauging whether or not she has learned is for her teacher bob to give her a exam. she has done well at learning if she does well on the exam. but what makes a reasonable exam? if bob spends the entire semester talking about machine learning and then gives alice an exam on history of pottery then alice s performance on this exam will not be representative of her learning. on the other hand if the exam only asks questions that bob has answered exactly during lectures then this is also a bad test of alice s learning especially if it s an open notes exam. what is desired is that alice observes specific examples from the course and then has to answer new but related questions on the exam. this tests whether alice has the ability to generalize. generalization is perhaps the most central concept in machine learning. as a running concrete example in this book we will use that of a course recommendation system for undergraduate computer science students. we have a collection of students and a collection of courses. each student has taken and evaluated a subset of the courses. the evaluation is simply a score from to the job of the recommender system is to predict how much a particular student alice will like a particular course algorithms. given historical data from course ratings the past we are trying to predict unseen ratings the future. now we could be unfair to this system as well. we could ask it whether alice is likely to enjoy the history of pottery course. this is unfair because the system has no idea what history of pottery even is and has no prior experience with this course. on the other hand we could ask it how much alice will like artificial intelligence which she took last year and rated as we would expect the system to predict that she would really like it but this isn t demonstrating that the system has learned it s simply recalling its past experience. in the former case we re expecting the system to generalize beyond its experience which is unfair. in the latter case we re not expecting it to generalize at all. this general set up of predicting the future based on the past is at the core of most machine learning. the objects that our algorithm will make predictions about are examples. in the recommender system setting an example would be some particular studentcourse pair as alicealgorithms. the desired prediction would be the rating that alice would give to algorithms. to make this concrete figure shows the general framework of induction. we are given training data on which our algorithm is expected to learn. this training data is the examples that alice observes in her machine learning course or the historical ratings data for the recommender system. based on this training data our learning algorithm induces a function f that will map a new example to a corresponding prediction. for example our function might guess that f learning might be high because our training data said that alice liked artificial intelligence. we want our algorithm to be able to make lots of predictions so we refer to the collection of examples on which we will evaluate our algorithm as the test set. the test set is a closely guarded secret it is the final exam on which our learning algorithm is being tested. if our algorithm gets to peek at it ahead of time it s going to cheat and do better than it should. decision trees figure the general supervised approach to machine learning a learning algorithm reads in training data and computes a learned function f this function can then automatically label future text examples. why is it bad if the learning algorithm gets to peek at the test data? a course in machine learning the goal of inductive machine learning is to take some training data and use it to induce a function f this function f will be evaluated on the test data. the machine learning algorithm has succeeded if its performance on the test data is high. some canonical learning problems there are a large number of typical inductive learning problems. the primary difference between them is in what type of thing they re trying to predict. here are some examples regression trying to predict a real value. for instance predict the value of a stock tomorrow given its past performance. or predict alice s score on the machine learning final exam based on her homework scores. binary classification trying to predict a simple yesno response. for instance predict whether alice will enjoy a course or not. or predict whether a user review of the newest apple product is positive or negative about the product. multiclass classification trying to put an example into one of a number of classes. for instance predict whether a news story is about entertainment sports politics religion etc. or predict whether a cs course is systems theory ai or other. ranking trying to put a set of objects in order of relevance. for in stance predicting what order to put web pages in in response to a user query. or predict alice s ranked preferences over courses she hasn t taken. the reason that it is convenient to break machine learning problems down by the type of object that they re trying to predict has to do with measuring error. recall that our goal is to build a system that can make good predictions. this begs the question what does it mean for a prediction to be good? the different types of learning problems differ in how they define goodness. for instance in regression predicting a stock price that is off by is perhaps much better than being off by the same does not hold of multiclass classification. there accidentally predicting entertainment instead of sports is no better or worse than predicting politics. the decision tree model of learning the decision tree is a classic and natural model of learning. it is closely related to the fundamental computer science notion of divide and conquer. although decision trees can be applied to many for each of these types of canonical machine learning problems come up with one or two concrete examples. learning problems we will begin with the simplest case binary classification. suppose that your goal is to predict whether some unknown user will enjoy some unknown course. you must simply answer yes or no. in order to make a guess you re allowed to ask binary questions about the usercourse under consideration. for example you is the course under consideration in systems? me yes you has this student taken any other systems courses? me yes you has this student liked most previous systems courses? me no you i predict this student will not like this course. the goal in learning is to figure out what questions to ask in what order to ask them and what answer to predict once you have asked enough questions. the decision tree is so-called because we can write our set of ques tions and guesses in a tree format such as that in figure in this figure the questions are written in the internal tree nodes and the guesses are written in the leaves each non-terminal node has two children the left child specifies what to do if the answer to the question is no and the right child specifies what to do if it is yes. in order to learn i will give you training data. this data consists of a set of usercourse examples paired with the correct answer for these examples the given user enjoy the given course?. from this you must construct your questions. for concreteness there is a small data set in table in the appendix of this book. this training data consists of course rating examples with course ratings and answers to questions that you might ask about this pair. we will interpret ratings of and as liked and ratings of and as hated. in what follows we will refer to the questions that you can ask as features and the responses to these questions as feature values. the rating is called the label. an example is just a set of feature values. and our training data is a set of examples paired with labels. there are a lot of logically possible trees that you could build even over just this small number of features number is in the millions. it is computationally infeasible to consider all of these to try to choose the best one. instead we will build our decision tree greedily. we will begin by asking if i could only ask one question what question would i ask? you want to find a feature that is most useful in helping you guess whether this student will enjoy this a useful way to think decision trees figure a decision tree for a course recommender system from which the in-text dialog is drawn. figure a histogram of labels for the entire data set the examples in the data set for each value of the first four features. a colleague related the story of getting his old nephew to guess a number between and his nephew s first four questions were is it bigger than is it even? does it have a in it? a course in machine learning about this is to look at the histogram of labels for each feature. this is shown for the first four features in figure each histogram shows the frequency of like hate labels for each possible value of an associated feature. from this figure you can see that asking the first feature is not useful if the value is no then it s hard to guess the label similarly if the answer is yes. on the other hand asking the second feature is useful if the value is no you can be pretty confident that this student will hate this course if the answer is yes you can be pretty confident that this student will like this course. more formally you will consider each feature in turn. you might consider the feature is this a system s course? this feature has two possible value no and yes. some of the training examples have an answer of no let s call that the no set. some of the training examples have an answer of yes let s call that the yes set. for each set and yes we will build a histogram over the labels. this is the second histogram in figure now suppose you were to ask this question on a random example and observe a value of no. further suppose that you must immediately guess the label for this example. you will guess like because that s the more prevalent label in the no set it s the only label in the no set. alternatively if you recieve an answer of yes you will guess hate because that is more prevalent in the yes set. so for this single feature you know what you would guess if you had to. now you can ask yourself if i made that guess on the training data how well would i have done? in particular how many examples would i classify correctly? in the no set you guessed like you would classify all of them correctly. in the yes set you guessed hate you would classify of of them correctly. so overall you would classify of correctly. thus we ll say that the score of the is this a system s course? question is you will then repeat this computation for each of the available features to us compute the scores for each of them. when you must choose which feature consider first you will want to choose the one with the highest score. but this only lets you choose the first feature to ask about. this is the feature that goes at the root of the decision tree. how do we choose subsequent features? this is where the notion of divide and conquer comes in. you ve already decided on your first feature is this a systems course? you can now partition the data into two parts the no part and the yes part. the no part is the subset of the data on which value for this feature is no the yes half is the rest. this is the divide step. how many training examples would you classify correctly for each of the other three features from figure decision trees return leafguess algorithm decisiontreetraindata remaining features guess most frequent answer in data if the labels in data are unambiguous then else if remaining features is empty then else return leafguess for all f remaining features do no the subset of data on which f yes the subset of data on which f scoref of majority vote answers in no of majority vote answers in yes default answer for this data base case no need to split further base case cannot split further we need to query more features the accuracy we would get if we only queried on f end for f the feature with maximal scoref no the subset of data on which f yes the subset of data on which f left decisiontreetrainno remaining features right decisiontreetrainyes remaining features return nodef left right end if algorithm decisiontreetesttree test point if tree is of the form leafguess then else if tree is of the form nodef left right then if f yes in test point then return guess return decisiontreetestleft test point else return decisiontreetestright test point end if end if the conquer step is to recurse and run the same routine the feature with the highest score on the no set get the left half of the tree and then separately on the yes set get the right half of the tree. at some point it will become useless to query on additional fea tures. for instance once you know that this is a systems course you know that everyone will hate it. so you can immediately predict hate without asking any additional questions. similarly at some point you might have already queried every available feature and still not whittled down to a single answer. in both cases you will need to create a leaf node and guess the most prevalent answer in the current piece of the training data that you are looking at. putting this all together we arrive at the algorithm shown in algorithm this function decisiontreetrain takes two argu there are more nuanced algorithms for building decision trees some of which are discussed in later chapters of this book. they primarily differ in how they compute the score funciton. a course in machine learning ments our data and the set of as-yet unused features. it has two base cases either the data is unambiguous or there are no remaining features. in either case it returns a leaf node containing the most likely guess at this point. otherwise it loops over all remaining features to find the one with the highest score. it then partitions the data into a noyes split based on the best feature. it constructs its left and right subtrees by recursing on itself. in each recursive call it uses one of the partitions of the data and removes the just-selected feature from consideration. the corresponding prediction algorithm is shown in algorithm this function recurses down the decision tree following the edges specified by the feature values in some test point. when it reaches a leaf it returns the guess associated with that leaf. todo define outlier somewhere! formalizing the learning problem as you ve seen there are several issues that we must take into account when formalizing the notion of learning. the performance of the learning algorithm should be measured on unseen test data. the way in which we measure performance should depend on the problem we are trying to solve. there should be a strong relationship between the data that our algorithm sees at training time and the data it sees at test time. in order to accomplish this let s assume that someone gives us a loss function of two arguments. the job of is to tell us how bad a system s prediction is in comparison to the truth. in particular if y is the truth and y is the system s prediction then y is a measure of error. for three of the canonical tasks discussed above we might use the following loss functions regression squared loss y or absolute loss y y. binary classification zeroone loss y multiclass classification also zeroone loss. if y y otherwise note that the loss function is something that you must decide on based on the goals of learning. is algorithm guaranteed to terminate? this notation means that the loss is zero if the prediction is correct and is one otherwise. why might it be a bad idea to use zeroone loss to measure performance for a regression problem? now that we have defined our loss function we need to consider where the data and test comes from. the model that we will use is the probabilistic model of learning. namely there is a probability distribution d over inputoutput pairs. this is often called the data generating distribution. if we write x for the input usercourse pair and y for the output rating then d is a distribution over y pairs. a useful way to think about d is that it gives high probability to reasonable y pairs and low probability to unreasonable y pairs. a y pair can be unreasonable in two ways. first x might be an unusual input. for example a x related to an intro to java course might be highly probable a x related to a geometric and solid modeling course might be less probable. second y might be an unusual rating for the paired x. for instance if alice were to take ai times remembering that she took it before! she would give the course a almost every time. perhaps some semesters she might give a slightly lower score but it would be unlikely to see x paired with y it is important to remember that we are not making any assumptions about what the distribution d looks like. instance we re not assuming it looks like a gaussian or some other common distribution. we are also not assuming that we know what d is. in fact if you know a priori what your data generating distribution is your learning problem becomes significantly easier. perhaps the hardest thing about machine learning is that we don t know what d is all we get is a random sample from it. this random sample is our training data. our learning problem then is defined by two quantities the loss function which captures our notion of what is important to learn. the data generating distribution d which defines what sort of data we expect to see. decision trees consider the following prediction task. given a paragraph written about a course we have to predict whether the paragraph is a positive or negative review of the course. is the sentiment analysis problem. what is a reasonable loss function? how would you define the data generating distribution? we are given access to training data which is a random sample of inputoutput pairs drawn from d. based on this training data we need to induce a function f that maps new inputs x to corresponding prediction y. the key property that f should obey is that it should do well measured by on future examples that are also drawn from d. formally it s expected loss over d with repsect to should be as small as possible f e dx f a course in machine learning the difficulty in minimizing our expected loss from eq is that we don t know what d is! all we have access to is some training data sampled from it! suppose that we denote our training data set by d. the training data consists of n-many inputoutput pairs yn. given a learned function f we can compute our training error n n f that is our training error is simply our average error over the train ing data. of course we can drive to zero by simply memorizing our train ing data. but as alice might find in memorizing past exams this might not generalize well to a new exam! this is the fundamental difficulty in machine learning the thing we have access to is our training error but the thing we care about minimizing is our expected error in order to get the expected error down our learned function needs to generalize beyond the training data to some future data that it might not have seen yet! so putting it all together we get a formal definition of induction machine learning given a loss function and a sample d from some unknown distribution d you must compute a function f that has low expected error over d with respect to inductive bias what we know before the data arrives d f by thinking verify by calculation that we can write our training error as e of d as a distribution that places probability to each example in d and probabiliy on everything else. decision trees math review expectated values f for the expected loss. here as always in this book we will often write things like e expectation means average. in words this is saying if you drew a bunch of y pairs independently at random from d what would your average loss be? formally what would be the average of f be over these random draws? more formally if d is a discrete probability distribution then this expectation can be expanded as e f d f this is exactly the weighted average loss over the all y pairs in d weighted by their probability dx y under this distribution d. in particular if d is a finite discrete distribution for instance one defined by a finite data set yn that puts equal weight on each example this case equal weight means probability then we get e f d n f f definition of expectation d is discrete and finite definition of d rearranging terms n n n n f f which is exactly the average loss on that dataset. in the case that the distribution is continuous we need to replace the discrete sum with a continuous integral over some space e f dx f this is exactly the same but in continuous space rather than discrete space. the most important thing to remember is that there are two equivalent ways to think about expections the expectation of some function g is the weighted average value of g where the weights are given by the underlying probability distribution. the expectation of some function g is your best guess of the value of g if you were to draw a single item from the underlying probability distribution. figure a course in machine learning in figure you ll find training data for a binary classification problem. the two labels are a and b and you can see five examples for each label. below in figure you will see some test data. these images are left unlabeled. go through quickly and based on the training data label these images. do it before you read further! i ll wait! most likely you produced one of two labelings either abbaab or abbaba. which of these solutions is right? the answer is that you cannot tell based on the training data. if you give this same example to people of them come up with the abbaab prediction and come up with the abbaba prediction. why are they doing this? presumably because the first group believes that the relevant distinction is between bird and non-bird while the second group believes that the relevant distinction is between fly and no-fly. this preference for one distinction over another is a bias that different human learners have. in the context of machine learning it is called inductive bias in the absense of data that narrow down the relevant concept what type of solutions are we more likely to prefer? two thirds of people seem to have an inductive bias in favor of birdnon-bird and one third seem to have an inductive bias in favor of flyno-fly. throughout this book you will learn about several approaches to machine learning. the decision tree model is the first such approach. these approaches differ primarily in the sort of inductive bias that they exhibit. consider a variant of the decision tree learning algorithm. in this variant we will not allow the trees to grow beyond some pre-defined maximum depth d. that is once we have queried on d-many features we cannot query on any more and must just make the best guess we can at that point. this variant is called a shallow decision tree. the key question is what is the inductive bias of shallow decision trees? roughly their bias is that decisions can be made by only looking at a small number of features. for instance a shallow decision tree would be very good at learning a function like students only like ai courses. it would be very bad at learning a function like if this student has liked an odd number of his past courses he will like the next one otherwise he will not. this latter is the parity function which requires you to inspect every feature to make a prediction. the inductive bias of a decision tree is that the sorts of things we want to learn to predict are more like the first example and less like the second example. figure dtbird bird training images figure dtbirdtest bird test images it is also possible that the correct classification on the test data is babaaa. this corresponds to the bias is the background in focus. somehow no one seems to come up with this classification rule. decision trees not everything is learnable although machine learning works well perhaps astonishingly well in many cases it is important to keep in mind that it is not magical. there are many reasons why a machine learning algorithm might fail on some learning task. there could be noise in the training data. noise can occur both at the feature level and at the label level. some features might correspond to measurements taken by sensors. for instance a robot might use a laser range finder to compute its distance to a wall. however this sensor might fail and return an incorrect value. in a sentiment classification problem someone might have a typo in their review of a course. these would lead to noise at the feature level. there might also be noise at the label level. a student might write a scathingly negative review of a course but then accidentally click the wrong button for the course rating. the features available for learning might simply be insufficient. for example in a medical context you might wish to diagnose whether a patient has cancer or not. you may be able to collect a large amount of data about this patient such as gene expressions x-rays family histories etc. but even knowing all of this information exactly it might still be impossible to judge for sure whether this patient has cancer or not. as a more contrived example you might try to classify course reviews as positive or negative. but you may have erred when downloading the data and only gotten the first five characters of each review. if you had the rest of the features you might be able to do well. but with this limited feature set there s not much you can do. some examples may not have a single correct answer. you might be building a system for safe web search which removes offensive web pages from search results. to build this system you would collect a set of web pages and ask people to classify them as offensive or not. however what one person considers offensive might be completely reasonable for another person. it is common to consider this as a form of label noise. nevertheless since you as the designer of the learning system have some control over this problem it is sometimes helpful to isolate it as a source of difficulty. finally learning might fail because the inductive bias of the learning algorithm is too far away from the concept that is being learned. in the birdnon-bird data you might think that if you had gotten a few more training examples you might have been able to tell whether this was intended to be a birdnon-bird classification or a flyno-fly classification. however no one i ve talked to has ever come up with the background is in focus classification. even with many a course in machine learning more training points this is such an unusual distinction that it may be hard for anyone to figure out it. in this case the inductive bias of the learner is simply too misaligned with the target classification to learn. note that the inductive bias source of error is fundamentally dif ferent than the other three sources of error. in the inductive bias case it is the particular learning algorithm that you are using that cannot cope with the data. maybe if you switched to a different learning algorithm you would be able to learn well. for instance neptunians might have evolved to care greatly about whether backgrounds are in focus and for them this would be an easy classification to learn. for the other three sources of error it is not an issue to do with the particular learning algorithm. the error is a fundamental part of the learning problem. underfitting and overfitting as with many problems it is useful to think about the extreme cases of learning algorithms. in particular the extreme cases of decision trees. in one extreme the tree is empty and we do not ask any questions at all. we simply immediately make a prediction. in the other extreme the tree is full. that is every possible question is asked along every branch. in the full tree there may be leaves with no associated training data. for these we must simply choose arbitrarily whether to say yes or no. consider the course recommendation data from table sup pose we were to build an empty decision tree on this data. such a decision tree will make the same prediction regardless of its input because it is not allowed to ask any questions about its input. since there are more likes than hates in the training data versus our empty decision tree will simply always predict likes. the training error is on the other hand we could build a full decision tree. since each row in this data is unique we can guarantee that any leaf in a full decision tree will have either or examples assigned to it of the leaves will have one example the rest will have none. for the leaves corresponding to training points the full decision tree will always make the correct prediction. given this the training error is of course our goal is not to build a model that gets error on the training data. this would be easy! our goal is a model that will do well on future unseen data. how well might we expect these two models to do on future data? the empty tree is likely to do not much better and not much worse on future data. we might expect decision trees convince yourself by proof or by simulation that even in the case of imbalanced data for instance data that is on average positive and negative a predictor that guesses randomly positivenegative will get about error. which feature is it and what is it s training error? that it would continue to get around error. life is more complicated for the full decision tree. certainly if it is given a test example that is identical to one of the training examples it will do the right thing no noise. but for everything else it will only get about error. this means that even if every other test point happens to be identical to one of the training points it would only get about error. in practice this is probably optimistic and maybe only one in every examples would match a training example yielding a error. so in one case tree we ve achieved about error and in the other case tree we ve achieved error. this is not very promising! one would hope to do better! in fact you might notice that if you simply queried on a single feature for this data you would be able to get very low training error but wouldn t be forced to guess randomly. this example illustrates the key concepts of underfitting and overfitting. underfitting is when you had the opportunity to learn something but didn t. a student who hasn t studied much for an upcoming exam will be underfit to the exam and consequently will not do well. this is also what the empty tree does. overfitting is when you pay too much attention to idiosyncracies of the training data and aren t able to generalize well. often this means that your model is fitting noise rather than whatever it is supposed to fit. a student who memorizes answers to past exam questions without understanding them has overfit the training data. like the full tree this student also will not do well on the exam. a model that is neither overfit nor underfit is the one that is expected to do best in the future. separation of training and test data suppose that after graduating you get a job working for a company that provides personalized recommendations for pottery. you go in and implement new algorithms based on what you learned in your machine learning class have learned the power of generalization!. all you need to do now is convince your boss that you have done a good job and deserve a raise! how can you convince your boss that your fancy learning algo rithms are really working? based on what we ve talked about already with underfitting and overfitting it is not enough to just tell your boss what your training error is. noise notwithstanding it is easy to get a training error of zero using a simple database query grep if you prefer. your boss will not fall for that. the easiest approach is to set aside some of your available data as a course in machine learning test data and use this to evaluate the performance of your learning algorithm. for instance the pottery recommendation service that you work for might have collected examples of pottery ratings. you will select of these as training data and set aside the final as test data. you will run your learning algorithms only on the training points. only once you re done will you apply your learned model to the test points and report your test error on those points to your boss. the hope in this process is that however well you do on the test points will be indicative of how well you are likely to do in the future. this is analogous to estimating support for a presidential candidate by asking a small sample of people for their opinions. statistics concentration bounds of which the central limit theorem is a famous example tells us that if the sample is large enough it will be a good representative. the split is not magic it s simply fairly well established. occasionally people use a split instead especially if they have a lot of data. the cardinal rule of machine learning is never touch your test data. ever. if that s not clear enough never ever touch your test data! if there is only one thing you learn from this book let it be that. do not look at your test data. even once. even a tiny peek. once you do that it is not test data any more. yes perhaps your algorithm hasn t seen it. but you have. and you are likely a better learner than your learning algorithm. consciously or otherwise you might make decisions based on whatever you might have seen. once you look at the test data your model s performance on it is no longer indicative of it s performance on future unseen data. this is simply because future data is unseen but your test data no longer is. models parameters and hyperparameters the general approach to machine learning which captures many existing learning algorithms is the modeling approach. the idea is that we come up with some formal model of our data. for instance we might model the classification decision of a studentcourse pair as a decision tree. the choice of using a tree to represent this model is our choice. we also could have used an arithmetic circuit or a polynomial or some other function. the model tells us what sort of things we can learn and also tells us what our inductive bias is. for most models there will be associated parameters. these are the things that we use the data to decide on. parameters in a decision if you have more data at your disposal why might a split be preferable to an split? decision trees go back to the decisiontreetrain algorithm and modify it so that it takes a maximum depth parameter. this should require adding two lines of code and modifying three others. tree include the specific questions we asked the order in which we asked them and the classification decisions at the leaves. the job of our decision tree learning algorithm decisiontreetrain is to take data and figure out a good set of parameters. many learning algorithms will have additional knobs that you can adjust. in most cases these knobs amount to tuning the inductive bias of the algorithm. in the case of the decision tree an obvious knob that one can tune is the maximum depth of the decision tree. that is we could modify the decisiontreetrain function so that it stops recursing once it reaches some pre-defined maximum depth. by playing with this depth knob we can adjust between underfitting empty tree depth and overfitting full tree depth such a knob is called a hyperparameter. it is so called because it is a parameter that controls other parameters of the model. the exact definition of hyperparameter is hard to pin down it s one of those things that are easier to identify than define. however one of the key identifiers for hyperparameters the main reason that they cause consternation is that they cannot be naively adjusted using the training data. in decisiontreetrain as in most machine learning the learn ing algorithm is essentially trying to adjust the parameters of the model so as to minimize training error. this suggests an idea for choosing hyperparameters choose them so that they minimize training error. what is wrong with this suggestion? suppose that you were to treat maximum depth as a hyperparameter and tried to tune it on your training data. to do this maybe you simply build a collection of decision trees where treed is a tree of maximum depth d. we then computed the training error of each of these trees and chose the ideal maximum depth as that which minimizes training error? which one would it pick? the answer is that it would pick d or in general it would pick d as large as possible. why? because choosing a bigger d will never hurt on the training data. by making d larger you are simply encouraging overfitting. but by evaluating on the training data overfitting actually looks like a good idea! an alternative idea would be to tune the maximum depth on test data. this is promising because test data peformance is what we really want to optimize so tuning this knob on the test data seems like a good idea. that is it won t accidentally reward overfitting. of course it breaks our cardinal rule about test data that you should never touch your test data. so that idea is immediately off the table. however our test data wasn t magic. we simply took our examples called of them training data and called the other some people call this validation data or held-out data. in step you could either choose the model on the training data that did the best on the development data. or you could choose the hyperparameter settings that did best and retrain the model on the union of training and development data. is either of these options obviously better or worse? a course in machine learning test data. so instead let s do the following. let s take our original data points and select of them as training data. from the remainder take as development and the remaining as test data. the job of the development data is to allow us to tune hyperparameters. the general approach is as follows split your data into training data development data and test data. for each possible setting of your hyperparameters train a model using that setting of hyperparameters on the training data. compute this model s error rate on the development data. from the above collection of models choose the one that achieved the lowest error rate on development data. evaluate that model on the test data to estimate future test perfor mance. chapter summary and outlook at this point you should be able to use decision trees to do machine learning. someone will give you data. you ll split it into training development and test portions. using the training and development data you ll find a good value for maximum depth that trades off between underfitting and overfitting. you ll then run the resulting decision tree model on the test data to get an estimate of how well you are likely to do in the future. you might think why should i read the rest of this book? aside from the fact that machine learning is just an awesome fun field to learn about there s a lot left to cover. in the next two chapters you ll learn about two models that have very different inductive biases than decision trees. you ll also get to see a very useful way of thinking about learning the geometric view of data. this will guide much of what follows. after that you ll learn how to solve problems more complicated that simple binary classification. learning people like binary classification a lot because it s one of the simplest non-trivial problems that we can work on. after that things will diverge you ll learn about ways to think about learning as a formal optimization problem ways to speed up learning ways to learn without labeled data with very little labeled data and all sorts of other fun topics. decision trees but throughout we will focus on the view of machine learning that you ve seen here. you select a model its associated inductive biases. you use data to find parameters of that model that work well on the training data. you use development data to avoid underfitting and overfitting. and you use test data you ll never look at or touch right? to estimate future model performance. then you conquer the world. exercises exercise todo. geometry and nearest neighbors learning objectives describe a data set as points in a high dimensional space. explain the curse of dimensionality. compute distances between points in high dimensional space. implement a k-nearest neighbor model of learning. draw decision boundaries. implement the k-means algorithm for clustering. dependencies chapter our brains have evolved to get us out of the rain find where the berries are and keep us from getting killed. our brains did not evolve to help us grasp really large numbers or to look at things in a hundred thousand dimensions. ronald graham you can think of prediction tasks as mapping inputs reviews to outputs ratings. as you learned in the previous chapter decomposing an input into a collection of features words that occur in the review forms a useful abstraction for learning. therefore inputs are nothing more than lists of feature values. this suggests a geometric view of data where we have one dimension for every feature. in this view examples are points in a highdimensional space. once we think of a data set as a collection of points in high dimen sional space we can start performing geometric operations on this data. for instance suppose you need to predict whether alice will like algorithms. perhaps we can try to find another student who is most similar to alice in terms of favorite courses. say this student is jeremy. if jeremy liked algorithms then we might guess that alice will as well. this is an example of a nearest neighbor model of learning. by inspecting this model we ll see a completely different set of answers to the key learning questions we discovered in chapter from data to feature vectors an example is just a collection of feature values about that example for instance the data in table from the appendix. to a person these features have meaning. one feature might count how many times the reviewer wrote excellent in a course review. another might count the number of exclamation points. a third might tell us if any text is underlined in the review. to a machine the features themselves have no meaning. only the feature values and how they vary across examples mean something to the machine. from this perspective you can think about an example as being represented by a feature vector consisting of one dimension for each feature where each dimenion is simply some real value. consider a review that said excellent three times had one excla geometry and nearest neighbors mation point and no underlined text. this could be represented by the feature vector an almost identical review that happened to have underlined text would have the feature vector note here that we have imposed the convention that for binary features features the corresponding feature values are and respectively. this was an arbitrary choice. we could have made them and if we wanted. but is convenient and helps us interpret the feature values. when we discuss practical issues in chapter you will see other reasons why is a good choice. figure shows the data from table in three views. these three views are constructed by considering two features at a time in different pairs. in all cases the plusses denote positive examples and the minuses denote negative examples. in some cases the points fall on top of each other which is why you cannot see unique points in all figures. the mapping from feature values to vectors is straighforward in the case of real valued features and binary features to zero or one. it is less clear what to do with categorical features. for example if our goal is to identify whether an object in an image is a tomato blueberry cucumber or cockroach we might want to know its color is it red blue green or black? one option would be to map red to a value of blue to a value of green to a value of and black to a value of the problem with this mapping is that it turns an unordered set set of colors into an ordered set set in itself this is not necessarily a bad thing. but when we go to use these features we will measure examples based on their distances to each other. by doing this mapping we are essentially saying that red and blue are more similar of than red and black of this is probably not what we want to say! a solution is to turn a categorical feature that can take four different values red blue green and black into four binary features isitred? isitblue? isitgreen? and isitblack?. in general if we start from a categorical feature that takes v values we can map it to v-many binary indicator features. with that you should be able to take a data set and map each example to a feature vector through the following mapping real-valued features get copied directly. binary features become false or true. categorical features with v possible values get mapped to v-many binary indicator features. figure a figure showing projections of data in two dimension in three ways see text. top horizontal axis corresponds to the first feature and the vertical axis corresponds to the second feature middle horizonal is second feature and vertical is third bottom horizonal is first and vertical is third. match the example ids from table with the points in figure the computer scientist in you might be saying actually we could map it to v-many binary features! is this a good idea or not? a course in machine learning after this mapping you can think of a single example as a vector in a high-dimensional feature space. if you have d-many features expanding categorical features then this feature vector will have d-many components. we will denote feature vectors as x so that xd denotes the value of the dth feature of x. since these are vectors with real-valued components in d-dimensions we say that they belong to the space rd. for d our feature vectors are just points in the plane like in figure for d this is three dimensional space. for d it becomes quite hard to visualize. should resist the temptation to think of d as time this will just make things confusing. unfortunately for the sorts of problems you will encounter in machine learning d is considered low dimensional d is medium dimensional and d is high dimensional. k-nearest neighbors can you think of problems ones already mentioned in this book! that are low dimensional? that are medium dimensional? that are high dimensional? the biggest advantage to thinking of examples as vectors in a high dimensional space is that it allows us to apply geometric concepts to machine learning. for instance one of the most basic things that one can do in a vector space is compute distances. in twodimensional space the distance between and is given in general in d-dimensional space the euclidean distance between vectors a and b is given by eq figure for geometric intuition in three dimensions d da b now that you have access to distances between examples you can start thinking about what it means to learn again. consider figure we have a collection of training data consisting of positive examples and negative examples. there is a test point marked by a question mark. your job is to guess the correct label for that point. most likely you decided that the label of this test point is positive. one reason why you might have thought that is that you believe that the label for an example should be similar to the label of nearby points. this is an example of a new form of inductive bias. the nearest neighbor classifier is build upon this insight. in com parison to decision trees the algorithm is ridiculously simple. at training time we simply store the entire training set. at test time we get a test example x. to predict its label we find the training example x that is most similar to x. in particular we find the training figure a figure showing euclidean distance in three dimensions verify that d from eq gives the same result for the previous computation. geometry and nearest neighbors store distance to training example n put lowest-distance objects first s s x algorithm knn-predictd k x s for n to n do end for s sorts y for k to k do sk y y yn end for return sign y n this is the kth closest data point vote according to the label for the nth training point return if y and if y example x that minimizes dx x. since x is a training example it has a corresponding label y. we predict that the label of x is also y. despite its simplicity this nearest neighbor classifier is incredibly effective. might say frustratingly effective. however it is particularly prone to overfitting label noise. consider the data in figure you would probably want to label the test point positive. unfortunately it s nearest neighbor happens to be negative. since the nearest neighbor algorithm only looks at the single nearest neighbor it cannot consider the preponderance of evidence that this point should probably actually be a positive example. it will make an unnecessary error. a solution to this problem is to consider more than just the single nearest neighbor when making a classification decision. we can consider the k-nearest neighbors and let them vote on the correct class for this test point. if you consider the neighbors of the test point in figure you will see that two of them are positive and one is negative. through voting positive would win. the full algorithm for k-nearest neighbor classification is given in algorithm note that there actually is no training phase for k-nearest neighbors. in this algorithm we have introduced five new conventions the training data is denoted by d. we assume that there are n-many training examples. these examples are pairs yn. do not confuse xn the nth training example with xd the dth feature for example x. we use denote an empty list and to append to that list. our prediction on x is called y. figure a figure showing an easy nn classification problem where the test point is a and should be positive but its nn is actually a negative point that s noisy. why is it a good idea to use an odd number for k? a course in machine learning the first step in this algorithm is to compute distances from the test point to all training points the data points are then sorted according to distance. we then apply a clever trick of summing the class labels for each of the k nearest neighbors and using the sign of this sum as our prediction. the big question of course is how to choose k. as we ve seen with k we run the risk of overfitting. on the other hand if k is large instance k n then knn-predict will always predict the majority class. clearly that is underfitting. so k is a hyperparameter of the knn algorithm that allows us to trade-off between overfitting value of k and underfitting value of k. one aspect of inductive bias that we ve seen for knn is that it assumes that nearby points should have the same label. another aspect which is quite different from decision trees is that all features are equally important! recall that for decision trees the key question was which features are most useful for classification? the whole learning algorithm for a decision tree hinged on finding a small set of good features. this is all thrown away in knn classifiers every feature is used and they are all used the same amount. this means that if you have data with only a few relevant features and lots of irrelevant features knn is likely to do poorly. a related issue with knn is feature scale. suppose that we are trying to classify whether some object is a ski or a snowboard figure we are given two features about this data the width and height. as is standard in skiing width is measured in millimeters and height is measured in centimeters. since there are only two features we can actually plot the entire training set see figure where ski is the positive class. based on this data you might guess that a knn classifier would do well. suppose however that our measurement of the width was com puted in millimeters of centimeters. this yields the data shown in figure since the width values are now tiny in comparison to the height values a knn classifier will effectively ignore the width values and classify almost purely based on height. the predicted class for the displayed test point had changed because of this feature scaling. we will discuss feature scaling more in chapter for now it is just important to keep in mind that knn does not have the power to decide which features are important. why is the sign of the sum computed in lines the same as the majority vote of the associated training examples? why can t you simply pick the value of k that does best on the training data? in other words why do we have to treat it like a hyperparameter rather than just a parameter. figure a figure of a ski and snowboard with width and height figure classification data for ski vs snowboard in geometry and nearest neighbors decision boundaries the standard way that we ve been thinking about learning algorithms up to now is in the query model. based on training data you learn something. i then give you a query example and you have to guess it s label. an alternative less passive way to think about a learned model is to ask what sort of test examples will it classify as positive and what sort will it classify as negative. in figure we have a set of training data. the background of the image is colored blue in regions that would be classified as positive a query were issued there and colored red in regions that would be classified as negative. this coloring is based on a neighbor classifier. in figure there is a solid line separating the positive regions from the negative regions. this line is called the decision boundary for this classifier. it is the line with positive land on one side and negative land on the other side. decision boundaries are useful ways to visualize the complex ity of a learned model. intuitively a learned model with a decision boundary that is really jagged the coastline of norway is really complex and prone to overfitting. a learned model with a decision boundary that is really simple the bounary between arizona and utah is potentially underfit. in figure you can see the decision boundaries for knn models with k as you can see the boundaries become simpler and simpler as k gets bigger. now that you know about decision boundaries it is natural to ask what do decision boundaries for decision trees look like? in order to answer this question we have to be a bit more formal about how to build a decision tree on real-valued features. that the algorithm you learned in the previous chapter implicitly assumed binary feature values. the idea is to allow the decision tree to ask questions of the form is the value of feature greater than that is for real-valued features the decision tree nodes are parameterized by a feature and a threshold for that feature. an example decision tree for classifying skis versus snowboards is shown in figure now that a decision tree can handle feature vectors we can talk about decision boundaries. by example the decision boundary for the decision tree in figure is shown in figure in the figure space is first split in half according to the first query along one axis. then depending on which half of the space you look at it is either split again along the other axis or simply classified. figure is a good visualization of decision boundaries for decision trees in general. their decision boundaries are axis-aligned figure decision boundary for figure decision boundary for knn with figure decision tree for ski vs. snowboard figure decision boundary for dt in previous figure a course in machine learning cuts. the cuts must be axis-aligned because nodes can only query on a single feature at a time. in this case since the decision tree was so shallow the decision boundary was relatively simple. k-means clustering up through this point you have learned all about supervised learning particular binary classification. as another example of the use of geometric intuitions and data we are going to temporarily consider an unsupervised learning problem. in unsupervised learning our data consists only of examples xn and does not contain corresponding labels. your job is to make sense of this data even though no one has provided you with correct labels. the particular notion of making sense of that we will talk about now is the clustering task. consider the data shown in figure since this is unsupervised learning and we do not have access to labels the data points are simply drawn as black dots. your job is to split this data set into three clusters. that is you should label each data point as a b or c in whatever way you want. for this data set it s pretty clear what you should do. you prob ably labeled the upper-left set of points a the upper-right set of points b and the bottom set of points c. or perhaps you permuted these labels. but chances are your clusters were the same as mine. the k-means clustering algorithm is a particularly simple and effective approach to producing clusters on data like you see in figure the idea is to represent each cluster by it s cluster center. given cluster centers we can simply assign each point to its nearest center. similarly if we know the assignment of points to clusters we can compute the centers. this introduces a chicken-and-egg problem. if we knew the clusters we could compute the centers. if we knew the centers we could compute the clusters. but we don t know either. the general computer science answer to chicken-and-egg problems is iteration. we will start with a guess of the cluster centers. based on that guess we will assign each data point to its closest center. given these new assignments we can recompute the cluster centers. we repeat this process until clusters stop moving. the first few iterations of the k-means algorithm are shown in figure in this example the clusters converge very quickly. algorithm spells out the k-means clustering algorithm in detail. the cluster centers are initialized randomly. in line data point xn is compared against each cluster center k. it is assigned to cluster k if k is the center with the smallest distance. is the argmin step. the variable zn stores the assignment value from to k of example n. in lines the cluster centers are re-computed. first xk what sort of data might yield a very simple decision boundary with a decision tree and very complex decision boundary with neighbor? what about the other way around? figure simple clustering data... clusters in ul ur and bc. figure first few iterations of k-means running on previous data set k some random location algorithm k-meansd k for k to k do end for repeat for n to n do zn argmink k xn end for for k to k do xk xn zn k k meanxk end for until s stop changing return z geometry and nearest neighbors randomly initialize mean for kth cluster assign example n to closest center points assigned to cluster k re-estimate mean of cluster k return cluster assignments math review vector arithmetic norms and means define vector addition scalar addition subtraction scalar multiplication and norms. define mean. figure stores all examples that have been assigned to cluster k. the center of cluster k k is then computed as the mean of the points assigned to it. this process repeats until the means converge. an obvious question about this algorithm is does it converge? a second question is how long does it take to converge. the first question is actually easy to answer. yes it does. and in practice it usually converges quite quickly fewer than iterations. in chapter we will actually prove that it converges. the question of how long it takes to converge is actually a really interesting question. even though the k-means algorithm dates back to the mid the best known convergence rates were terrible for a long time. here terrible means exponential in the number of data points. this was a sad situation because empirically we knew that it converged very quickly. new algorithm analysis techniques called smoothed analysis were invented in and have been used to show very fast convergence for k-means other algorithms. these techniques are well beyond the scope of this book this author! but suffice it to say that k-means is fast in practice and is provably fast in theory. it is important to note that although k-means is guaranteed to converge and guaranteed to converge quickly it is not guaranteed to converge to the right answer. the key problem with unsupervised learning is that we have no way of knowing what the right answer is. convergence to a bad solution is usually due to poor initialization. for example poor initialization in the data set from before yields convergence like that seen in figure as you can see the algorithm a course in machine learning has converged. it has just converged to something less than satisfactory. warning high dimensions are scary visualizing one hundred dimensional space is incredibly difficult for humans. after huge amounts of training some people have reported that they can visualize four dimensional space in their heads. but beyond that seems in addition to being hard to visualize there are at least two additional problems in high dimensions both refered to as the curse of dimensionality. one is computational the other is mathematical. from a computational perspective consider the following problem. for k-nearest neighbors the speed of prediction is slow for a very large data set. at the very least you have to look at every training example every time you want to make a prediction. to speed things up you might want to create an indexing data structure. you can break the plane up into a grid like that shown in figure now when the test point comes in you can quickly identify the grid cell in which it lies. now instead of considering all training points you can limit yourself to training points in that grid cell perhaps the neighboring cells. this can potentially lead to huge computational savings. space up into a grid whose cells are we can clearly do this with grid cells in two dimensions the range of the features is to for simplicity. in three dimensions we ll need grid cells. in four dimensions we ll need by the time we get to low dimensional data in dimensions we ll need grid cells s trillion which is about to times the us national debt as of january so if you re in dimensions this gridding technique will only be useful if you have at least trillion training examples. in two dimensions this procedure is effective. if we want to break for medium dimensional data dimesions the number of grid cells is a followed by numbers before the decimal point. for comparison the number of atoms in the universe is approximately followed by zeros. so even if each atom yielded a googul training examples we d still have far fewer examples than grid cells. for high dimensional data dimensions we have a followed by just under zeros. far too big a number to even really comprehend. suffice it to say that for even moderately high dimensions the amount of computation involved in these problems is enormous. in addition to the computational difficulties of working in high what is the difference between unsupervised and supervised learning that means that we know what the right answer is for supervised learning but not for unsupervised learning? if you want to try to get an intuitive sense of what four dimensions looks like i highly recommend the short book flatland a romance of many dimensions by edwin abbott abbott. you can even read it online at figure knn with an overlaid grid cell with test point highlighted how does the above analysis relate to the number of data points you would need to fill out a full decision tree with d-many features? what does this say about the importance of shallow trees? geometry and nearest neighbors dimensions there are a large number of strange mathematical occurances there. in particular many of your intuitions that you ve built up from working in two and three dimensions just do not carry over to high dimensions. we will consider two effects but there are countless others. the first is that high dimensional spheres look more like porcupines than like the second is that distances between points in high dimensions are all approximately the same. let s start in two dimensions as in figure we ll start with four green spheres each of radius one and each touching exactly two other green spheres. that in two dimensions a sphere is just a circle. we ll place a red sphere in the middle so that it touches all four green spheres. we can easily compute the radius of this small sphere. the pythagorean theorem says that thus by calculation so solving for r we get r the blue sphere lies entirely within the cube square that contains the grey spheres. this is also obvious from the picture but perhaps you can see where this is going. now we can do the same experiment in three dimensions as shown in figure again we can use the pythagorean theorem to compute the radius of the blue sphere. now we get this is still entirely enclosed in the so r cube of width four that holds all eight grey spheres. at this point it becomes difficult to produce figures so you ll have to apply your imagination. in four dimensions we would have green spheres hyperspheres each of radius one. they would still be inside a cube a hypercube of width four. the continuing blue hypersphere would have radius r to five dimensions the blue hypersphere embedded in green hyperspheres would have radius r and so on. in general in d-dimensional space there will be green hyper spheres of radius one. each green hypersphere will touch exactly n-many other hyperspheres. the blue hyperspheres in the middle will touch them all and will have radius r d this result was related to me by mark reid who heard about it from marcus hutter. figure spheres in spheres figure spheres in spheres think about this for a moment. as the number of dimensions grows the radius of the blue hypersphere grows without bound!. for example in the radius of the blue hypersphere is now but with a radius of two the blue hypersphere is now squeezing between the green hypersphere and touching the edges of the hypercube. in dimensional space the radius is approximately and it pokes outside the cube. this is why we say that high dimensional spheres look like porcupines and not balls figure the moral of this story from a machine learning perspective is that intuitions you have about space might not carry over to high dimensions. for example what you figure porcupine versus ball a course in machine learning think looks like a round cluster in two or three dimensions might not look so round in high dimensions. the second strange fact we will consider has to do with the distances between points in high dimensions. we start by considering random points in one dimension. that is we generate a fake data set consisting of random points between zero and one. we can do the same in two dimensions and in three dimensions. see figure for data distributed uniformly on the unit hypercube in different dimensions. now pick two of these points at random and compute the distance between them. repeat this process for all pairs of points and average the results. for the data shown in figure the average distance between points in one dimension is about in two dimensions is about and in three dimensions is the fact that these increase as the dimension increases is not surprising. the furthest two points can be in a hypercube is the furthest in a hypercube is corners the furthest in a hypercube is the furthest two points in a d-dimensional hypercube will be d. you can actually compute these values analytically. write unid for the uniform distribution in d dimensions. the quantity we are interested in computing is and so on. in general avgdistd ea unid eb unid we can actually compute this in closed form exercise for a bit of calculus refresher and arrive at avgdistd we know that the maximum distance between two points grows like d this says that the ratio between average distance and maximum because distance converges to what is more interesting however is the variance of the distribution of distances. you can show that in d dimensions the variance is constant independent of d. this means that when you look at divided-by distance the variance behaves like as d grows which means that the effective variance continues to shrink when i first saw and re-proved this result i was skeptical as i imagine you are. so i implemented it. in figure you can see the results. this presents a histogram of distances between random points in d dimensions for d as you can see d even for all of these distances begin to concentrate around medium dimension problems. you should now be terrified the only bit of information that knn gets is distances. and you ve just seen that in moderately high dimensions all distances becomes equal. so then isn t it the case that figure uniform random points in and dimensions sergey brin. near neighbor search in large metric spaces. in conference on very large databases figure histogram of distances in of pairs of points at that distancedimensionality versus uniform point dims geometry and nearest neighbors knn simply cannot work? the answer has to be no. the reason is that the data that we get is not uniformly distributed over the unit hypercube. we can see this by looking at two real-world data sets. the first is an image data set of hand-written digits through nine see section although this data is originally in dimensions pixels by pixels we can artifically reduce the dimensionality of this data. in figure you can see the histogram of average distances between points in this data at a number of dimensions. as you can see from these histograms distances have not concentrated around a single value. this is very good news it means that there is hope for learning algorithms to work! nevertheless the moral is that high dimensions are weird. extensions to knn there are several fundamental problems with knn classifiers. first some neighbors might be better than others. second test-time performance scales badly as your number of training examples increases. third it treats each dimension independently. we will not address the third issue as it has not really been solved it makes a great thought question!. regarding neighborliness consider figure using k nearest neighbors the test point would be classified as positive. however we might actually believe that it should be classified negative because the two negative neighbors are much closer than the three positive neighbors. there are at least two ways of addressing this issue. the first is the solution. instead of connecting each data point to some fixed number of nearest neighbors we simply connect it to all neighbors that fall within some ball of radius then the majority class of all the points in the ball wins. in the case of a tie you would have to either guess or report the majority class. figure shows an ball around the test point that happens to yield the proper classification. when using nearest neighbors rather than knn the hyperparameter changes from k to you would need to set it in the same way as you would for knn. an alternative to the solution is to do weighted nearest neighbors. the idea here is to still consider the k-nearest neighbors of a test point but give them uneven votes. closer points get more vote than further points. when classifying a point x the usual strategy is to give a training point xn a vote that decays exponentially in the distance between x and xn. mathematically the vote that neigh figure knnmnist histogram of distances in multiple d for mnist figure data set with test point closest to two negatives then to three far positives figure same as previous with ball one issue with is that the for some test point might be empty. how would you handle this? a course in machine learning bor n gets is exp x thus nearby points get a vote very close to and far away points get a vote very close to the overall prediction is positive if the sum of votes from positive neighbors outweighs the sum of votes from negative neighbors. the second issue with knn is scaling. to predict the label of a single test point we need to find the k nearest neighbors of that test point in the training data. with a standard implementation this will take ond k log k for very large data sets this is impractical. a first attempt to speed up the computation is to represent each class by a representative. a natural choice for a representative would be the mean. we would collapse all positive examples down to their mean and all negative examples down to their mean. we could then just run neighbor and check whether a test point is closer to the mean of the positive points or the mean of the negative points. figure shows an example in which this would probably work well and an example in which this would probably work poorly. the problem is that collapsing each class to its mean is too aggressive. a less aggressive approach is to make use of the k-means algorithm for clustering. you can cluster the positive examples into l clusters are using l to avoid variable overloading! and then cluster the negative examples into l separate clusters. this is shown in figure with l instead of storing the entire data set you would only store the means of the l positive clusters and the means of the l negative clusters. at test time you would run the k-nearest neighbors algorithm against these means rather than against the full training set. this leads to a much faster runtime of just old k log k which is probably dominated by ld. could you combine the idea with the weighted voting idea? does it make sense or does one idea seem to trump the other? the nd term comes from computing distances between the test point and all training points. the k log k term comes from finding the k smallest values in the list of distances using a median-finding algorithm. of course nd almost always dominates k log k in practice. exercises exercise todo. figure knncollapse two figures of points collapsed to mean one with good results and one with dire results figure data from previous bad case collapsed into cluster and test point classified based on means and clustering of classes was introduced as a way of making things faster. will it make things worse or the perceptron so far you ve seen two types of learning models in decision trees only a small number of features are used to make decisions in nearest neighbor algorithms all features are used equally. neither of these extremes is always desirable. in some problems we might want to use most of the features but use some more than others. in this chapter we ll discuss the perceptron algorithm for learning weights for features. as we ll see learning weights for features amounts to learning a hyperplane classifier that is basically a division of space into two halves by a straight line where one half is positive and one half is negative. in this sense the perceptron can be seen as explicitly finding a good linear decision boundary. learning objectives describe the biological motivation behind the perceptron. classify learning algorithms based on whether they are error-driven or not. implement the perceptron algorithm for binary classification. draw perceptron weight vectors and the corresponding decision boundaries in two dimensions. contrast the decision boundaries of decision trees nearest neighbor algorithms and perceptrons. compute the margin of a given weight vector on a given data set. bio-inspired learning dependencies chapter chapter folk biology tells us that our brains are made up of a bunch of little units called neurons that send electrical signals to one another. the rate of firing tells us how activated a neuron is. a single neuron like that shown in figure might have three incoming neurons. these incoming neurons are firing at different rates have different activations. based on how much these incoming neurons are firing and how strong the neural connections are our main neuron will decide how strongly it wants to fire. and so on through the whole brain. learning in the brain happens by neurons becomming connected to other neurons and the strengths of connections adapting over time. the real biological world is much more complicated than this. however our goal isn t to build a brain but to simply be inspired by how they work. we are going to think of our learning algorithm as a single neuron. it receives input from d-many other neurons one for each input feature. the strength of these inputs are the feature values. this is shown schematically in figure each incoming connection has a weight and the neuron simply sums up all the weighted inputs. based on this sum it decides whether to fire or figure a picture of a neuron figure figure showing feature vector and weight vector and products and sum a course in machine learning not. firing is interpreted as being a positive example and not firing is interpreted as being a negative example. in particular if the weighted sum is positive it fires and otherwise it doesn t fire. this is shown diagramatically in figure mathematically an input vector x arrives. the neuron stores d-many weights wd. the neuron computes the sum d a wdxd to determine it s amount of activation. if this activiation is positive a it predicts that this example is a positive example. otherwise it predicts a negative example. the weights of this neuron are fairly easy to interpret. suppose that a feature for instance is this a system s class? gets a zero weight. then the activation is the same regardless of the value of this feature. so features with zero weight are ignored. features with positive weights are indicative of positive examples because they cause the activation to increase. features with negative weights are indicative of negative examples because they cause the activiation to decrease. it is often convenient to have a non-zero threshold. in other words we might want to predict positive if a for some value the way that is most convenient to achieve this is to introduce a bias term into the neuron so that the activation is always increased by some fixed value b. thus we compute d a wdxd b what would happen if we encoded binary features like is this a system s class as and yes than the standard and this is the complete neural model of learning. the model is parameterized by d-many weights wd and a single scalar bias value b. if you wanted the activation threshold to be a instead of a what value would b have to be? error-driven updating the perceptron algorithm vignette the history of the perceptron todo the perceptron is a classic learning algorithm for the neural model of learning. like k-nearest neighbors it is one of those frustrating algorithms that is incredibly simple and yet works amazingly well for some types of problems. the perceptron initialize weights initialize bias algorithm perceptrontraind maxiter wd for all d d b for iter maxiter do for all d do wd xd b a d if ya then wd wd yxd for all d d b b y compute activation for this example update weights update bias end if end for end for return wd b algorithm wd b x a d return signa wd xd b compute activation for the test example the algorithm is actually quite different than either the decision tree algorithm or the knn algorithm. first it is online. this means that instead of considering the entire data set at the same time it only ever looks at one example. it processes that example and then goes on to the next one. second it is error driven. this means that so long as it is doing well it doesn t bother updating its parameters. the algorithm maintains a guess at good parameters and bias as it runs. it processes one example at a time. for a given example it makes a prediction. it checks to see if this prediction is correct that this is training data so we have access to true labels. if the prediction is correct it does nothing. only when the prediction is incorrect does it change its parameters and it changes them in such a way that it would do better on this example next time around. it then goes on to the next example. once it hits the last example in the training set it loops back around for a specified number of iterations. the training algorithm for the perceptron is shown in algo rithm and the corresponding prediction algorithm is shown in algorithm there is one trick in the training algorithm which probably seems silly but will be useful later. it is in line when we check to see if we want to make an update or not. we want to make an update if the current prediction signa is incorrect. the trick is to multiply the true label y by the activation a and compare this against zero. since the label y is either or you just need to realize that ya is positive whenever a and y have the same sign. in other words the product ya is positive if the current prediction is correct. it is very very important to check ya rather than ya why? a course in machine learning the particular form of update for the perceptron is quite simple. the weight wd is increased by yxd and the bias is increased by y. the goal of the update is to adjust the parameters so that they are better for the current example. in other words if we saw this example twice in a row we should do a better job the second time around. to see why this particular update achieves this consider the fol lowing scenario. we have some current set of parameters wd b. we observe an example y. for simplicity suppose this is a positive example so y we compute an activation a and make an error. namely a we now update our weights and bias. let s call the new weights d suppose we observe the same example again and need to compute a new activation we proceed by a little algebra d d d dxd xdxd wdxd b d xdxd a d d a d but so the difference between the old activation a and the new activad since it s squared. so this value is tion is d always at least one. thus the new activation is always at least the old activation plus one. since this was a positive example we have successfully moved the activation in the proper direction. note that there s no guarantee that we will correctly classify this point the second third or even fourth time around! the only hyperparameter of the perceptron algorithm is maxiter the number of passes to make over the training data. if we make many many passes over the training data then the algorithm is likely to overfit. would be like studying too long for an exam and just confusing yourself. on the other hand going over the data only one time might lead to underfitting. this is shown experimentally in figure the x-axis shows the number of passes over the data and the y-axis shows the training error and the test error. as you can see there is a sweet spot at which test performance begins to degrade due to overfitting. one aspect of the perceptron algorithm that is left underspecified is line which says loop over all the training examples. the natural implementation of this would be to loop over them in a constant order. the is actually a bad idea. this analysis hold for the case positive examples it should also hold for negative examples. work it out. figure training and test error via early stopping consider what the perceptron algorithm would do on a data set that consisted of positive examples followed by negative examples. after seeing the first few positive examples five it would likely decide that every example is positive and would stop learning anything. it would do well for a while examples until it hit the batch of negative examples. then it would take a while ten examples before it would start predicting everything as negative. by the end of one pass through the data it would really only have learned from a handful of examples in this case. so one thing you need to avoid is presenting the examples in some fixed order. this can easily be accomplished by permuting the order of examples once in the beginning and then cycling over the data set in the same order each iteration. however it turns out that you can actually do better if you re-permute the examples in each iteration. figure shows the effect of re-permuting on convergence speed. in practice permuting each iteration tends to yield about savings in number of iterations. in theory you can actually prove that it s expected to be about twice as fast. geometric intrepretation the perceptron figure training and test error for permuting versus not-permuting if permuting the data each iteration saves somewhere between and of your time are there any cases in which you might not want to permute the data every iteration? a question you should be asking yourself by now is what does the decision boundary of a perceptron look like? you can actually answer that question mathematically. for a perceptron the decision boundary is precisely where the sign of the activation a changes from to in other words it is the set of points x that achieve zero activation. the points that are not clearly positive nor negative. for simplicity we ll first consider the case where there is no bias term equivalently the bias is zero. formally the decision boundary b is b x d wdxd we can now apply some linear algebra. recall that d wdxd is just the dot product between the vector w and the vector x. we will write this as w x. two vectors have a zero dot product if and only if they are perpendicular. thus if we think of the weights as a vector w then the decision boundary is simply the plane perpendicular to w. a course in machine learning math review dot products dot products definition perpendicular normalization and projections... think about basis vectors for projections. quadratic rule on vectors. also that dot products onto unit vectors are maximized when they point in the same direction so aa ab blah blah blah. figure this is shown pictorially in figure here the weight vector is shown together with it s perpendicular plane. this plane forms the decision boundary between positive points and negative points. the vector points in the direction of the positive examples and away from the negative examples. one thing to notice is that the scale of the weight vector is irrele vant from the perspective of classification. suppose you take a weight vector w and replace it with all activations are now doubled. but their sign does not change. this makes complete sense geometrically since all that matters is which side of the plane a test point falls on now how far it is from that plane. for this reason it is common to work with normalized weight vectors w that have length one i.e. the geometric intuition can help us even more when we realize that dot products compute projections. that is the value w x is just the distance of x from the origin when projected onto the vector w. this is shown in figure in that figure all the data points are projected onto w. below we can think of this as a one-dimensional version of the data where each data point is placed according to its projection along w. this distance along w is exactly the activiation of that example with no bias. from here you can start thinking about the role of the bias term. previously the threshold would be at zero. any example with a negative projection onto w would be classified negative any example with a positive projection positive. the bias simply moves this threshold. now after the projection is computed b is added to get the overall activation. the projection plus b is then compared against zero. thus from a geometric perspective the role of the bias is to shift the decision boundary away from the origin in the direction of w. it is shifted exactly b units. so if b is positive the boundary is shifted away from w and if b is negative the boundary is shifted toward w. this is shown in figure this makes intuitive sense a positive bias means that more examples should be classified positive. by moving the decision boundary in the negative direction more space yields a figure picture of data points with hyperplane and weight vector if i give you an arbitrary non-zero weight vector w how do i compute a weight vector that points in the same direction but has a norm of one? figure same picture as before but with projections onto weight vector todo then below those points along a one-dimensional axis with zero marked. the decision boundary for a perceptron is a very magical thing. in positive classification. d dimensional space it is always a d hyperplane. two dimensions a hyperplane is simply a line. in three dimensions a hyperplane is like a sheet of paper. this hyperplane divides space in half. in the rest of this book we ll refer to the weight vector and to hyperplane it defines interchangeably. the perceptron update can also be considered geometrically. simplicity we will consider the unbiased case. consider the situation in figure here we have a current guess as to the hyperplane and positive training example comes in that is currently misclassified. the weights are updated w w yx. this yields the new weight vector also shown in the figure. in this case the weight vector changed enough that this training example is now correctly classified. interpreting perceptron weights todo perceptron convergence and linear separability you already have an intuitive feeling for why the perceptron works it moves the decision boundary in the direction of the training examples. a question you should be asking yourself is does the perceptron converge? if so what does it converge to? and how long does it take? it is easy to construct data sets on which the perceptron algorithm will never converge. in fact consider the uninteresting learning problem with no features. you have a data set consisting of one positive example and one negative example. since there are no features the only thing the perceptron algorithm will ever do is adjust the bias. given this data you can run the perceptron for a bajillion iterations and it will never settle down. as long as the bias is nonnegative the negative example will cause it to decrease. as long as it is non-positive the positive example will cause it to increase. ad infinitum. this is a very contrived example. what does it mean for the perceptron to converge? it means that it can make an entire pass through the training data without making any more updates. in other words it has correctly classified every training example. geometrically this means that it was found some hyperplane that correctly segregates the data into positive and negative examples like that shown in figure in this case this data is linearly separable. this means that there the perceptron figure perceptron picture with update no bias figure separable data a course in machine learning exists some hyperplane that puts all the positive examples on one side and all the negative examples on the other side. if the training is not linearly separable like that shown in figure then the perceptron has no hope of converging. it could never possibly classify each point correctly. the somewhat surprising thing about the perceptron algorithm is that if the data is linearly separable then it will converge to a weight vector that separates the data. if the data is inseparable then it will never converge. this is great news. it means that the perceptron converges whenever it is even remotely possible to converge. the second question is how long does it take to converge? by how long what we really mean is how many updates? as is the case for much learning theory you will not be able to get an answer of the form it will converge after updates. this is asking too much. the sort of answer we can hope to get is of the form it will converge after at most updates. what you might expect to see is that the perceptron will con verge more quickly for easy learning problems than for hard learning problems. this certainly fits intuition. the question is how to define easy and hard in a meaningful way. one way to make this definition is through the notion of margin. if i give you a data set and hyperplane that separates it that shown in figure then the margin is the distance between the hyperplane and the nearest point. intuitively problems with large margins should be easy s lots of wiggle room to find a separating hyperplane and problems with small margins should be hard really have to get a very specific well tuned weight vector. formally given a data set d a weight vector w and bias b the margin of w b on d is defined as minxy d x margind w b if w separates d otherwise in words the margin is only defined if w b actually separate the data it is just in the case that it separates the data we find the point with the minimum activation after the activation is multiplied by the label. for some historical reason is unknown to the author margins are always denoted by the greek letter one often talks about the margin of a data set. the margin of a data set is the largest attainable margin on this data. formally margind sup wb margind w b in words to compute the margin of a data set you try every possible w b pair. for each pair you compute its margin. we then take the so long as the margin is not it is always positive. geometrically this makes sense but what does eq yeild this? the perceptron you can read sup as max if you like the only difference is a technical difference in how the case is handled. rosenblatt largest of these as the overall margin of the if the data is not linearly separable then the value of the sup and therefore the value of the margin is there is a famous theorem due to that shows that the number of errors that the perceptron algorithm makes is bounded by more formally theorem convergence theorem. suppose the perceptron algorithm is run on a linearly separable data set d with margin assume that for all x d. then the algorithm will converge after at most updates. todo comment on norm of w and norm of x also some picture about maximum margins. the proof of this theorem is elementary in the sense that it does not use any fancy tricks it s all just algebra. the idea behind the proof is as follows. if the data is linearly separable with margin then there exists some weight vector w that achieves this margin. obviously we don t know what w is but we know it exists. the perceptron algorithm is trying to find a weight vector w that points roughly in the same direction as w large roughly can be very rough. for small roughly is quite precise. every time the perceptron makes an update the angle between w and w changes. what we prove is that the angle actually decreases. we show this in two steps. first the dot product w w increases a lot. second the norm does not increase very much. since the dot product is increasing but w isn t getting too long the angle between them has to be shrinking. the rest is algebra. proof of theorem the margin must be realized by some set of parameters say x suppose we train a perceptron on this data. denote by the initial weight vector the weight vector after the first update and wk the weight vector after the kth update. are essentially ignoring data points on which the perceptron doesn t update itself. first we will show that w wk grows quicky as a function of k. second we will show does not grow quickly. first suppose that the kth update happens on example y. we are trying to show that wk is becoming aligned with w because we updated know that this example was misclassified x after the update we get wk yx. we do a little computation w wk w yx w yw x w definition of wk vector algebra w has margin a course in machine learning thus every time wk is updated its projection onto w incrases by at least therefore w wk k because wk is getting closer to w not just because it s getting exceptionally long. to do this we compute the norm of wk next we need to show that the increase of along w occurs yx x definition of wk quadratic rule on vectors assumption on and a thus the squared norm of wk increases by at most one every up date. therefore k. w wk. putting this together we have k w wk k now we put together the two things we have learned before. by our first conclusion we know w wk k but our second conclusion k finally because w is a unit vector we know taking the left-most and right-most terms we get that dividing both sides by k we get k this means that once we ve made updates we cannot make any more! k k and therefore k it is important to keep in mind what this proof shows and what it does not show. it shows that if i give the perceptron data that is linearly separable with margin then the perceptron will converge to a solution that separates the data. and it will converge quickly when is large. it does not say anything about the solution other than the fact that it separates the data. in particular the proof makes use of the maximum margin separator. but the perceptron is not guaranteed to find this maximum margin separator. the data may be separable with margin and the perceptron might still find a separating hyperplane with a margin of only later chapter we will see algorithms that explicitly try to find the maximum margin solution. improved generalization voting and averaging in the beginning of this chapter there was a comment that the perceptron works amazingly well. this was a half-truth. the vanilla perhaps we don t want to assume that all x have norm at most if they have all have norm at most r you can achieve a very similar bound. modify the perceptron convergence proof to handle this case. why does the perceptron convergence bound not contradict the earlier claim that poorly ordered data points all positives followed by all negatives will cause the perceptron to take an astronomically long time to learn? the perceptron perceptron algorithm does well but not amazingly well. in order to make it more competitive with other learning algorithms you need to modify it a bit to get better generalization. the key issue with the vanilla perceptron is that it counts later points more than it counts earlier points. to see why consider a data set with examples. suppose that after the first examples the perceptron has learned a really good classifier. it s so good that it goes over the next examples without making any updates. it reaches the example and makes an error. it updates. for all we know the update on this example completely ruines the weight vector that has done so well on of the data! what we would like is for weight vectors that survive a long time to get more say than weight vectors that are overthrown quickly. one way to achieve this is by voting. as the perceptron learns it remembers how long each hyperplane survives. at test time each hyperplane encountered during training votes on the class of a test example. if a particular hyperplane survived for examples then it gets a vote of if it only survived for one example it only gets a vote of in particular let bk be the k weight vectors encountered during training and ck be the survival times for each of these weight vectors. weight vector that gets immediately updated gets c one that survives another round gets c and so on. then the prediction on a test point is k wk x y sign cksign this algorithm known as the voted perceptron works quite well in practice and there is some nice theory showing that it is guaranteed to generalize better than the vanilla perceptron. unfortunately it is also completely impractical. if there are updates made during perceptron learning the voted perceptron requires that you store weight vectors together with their counts. this requires an absurd amount of storage and makes prediction times slower than the vanilla perceptron. a much more practical alternative is the averaged perceptron. the idea is similar you maintain a collection of weight vectors and survival times. however at test time you predict according to the average weight vector rather than the voting. in particular the prediction is k wk x y sign the only difference between the voted prediction eq and the the training algorithm for the voted perceptron is the same as the vanilla perceptron. in particular in line of algorithm the activation on a training example is computed based on the current weight vector not based on the voted prediction. why? a course in machine learning algorithm averagedperceptrontraind maxiter w u c for iter maxiter do b initialize weights and bias initialize cached weights and bias initialize example counter to one if yw x b then for all d do w w y x b b y u u y c x y c end if c c end for end for return w c u b c update weights update bias update cached weights update cached bias increment counter regardless of update return averaged weights and bias averaged prediction eq is the presense of the interior sign operator. with a little bit of algebra we can rewrite the test-time prediction as k y sign ckwk x k ckbk the advantage of the averaged perceptron is that we can simply maintain a running sum of the averaged weight vector blue term and averaged bias red term. test-time prediction is then just as efficient as it is with the vanilla perceptron. the full training algorithm for the averaged perceptron is shown in algorithm some of the notation is changed from the original perceptron namely vector operations are written as vector operations and the activation computation is folded into the error checking. it is probably not immediately apparent from algorithm that the computation unfolding is precisely the calculation of the averaged weights and bias. the most natural implementation would be to keep track of an averaged weight vector u. at the end of every example you would increase u u w similarly for the bias. however such an implementation would require that you updated the averaged vector on every example rather than just on the examples that were incorrectly classified! since we hope that eventually the perceptron learns to do a good job we would hope that it will not make updates on every example. so ideally you would like to only update the averaged weight vector when the actual weight vector changes. the slightly clever computation in algorithm achieves this. the averaged perceptron is almost always better than the per by writing out the computation of the averaged weights from eq as a telescoping sum derive the computation from algorithm ceptron in the sense that it generalizes better to test data. however that does not free you from having to do early stopping. it will eventually overfit. figure shows the performance of the vanilla perceptron and the averaged perceptron on the same data set with both training and test performance. as you can see the averaged perceptron does generalize better. but it also does begin to overfit eventually. limitations of the perceptron although the perceptron is very useful it is fundamentally limited in a way that neither decision trees nor knn are. its limitation is that its decision boundaries can only be linear. the classic way of showing this limitation is through the xor problem exclusive or. the xor problem is shown graphically in figure it consists of four data points each at a corner of the unit square. the labels for these points are the same along the diagonals. you can try but you will not be able to find a linear decision boundary that perfectly separates these data points. one question you might ask is do xor-like problems exist in the real world? unfortunately for the perceptron the answer is yes. consider a sentiment classification problem that has three features that simply say whether a given word is contained in a review of a course. these features are excellent terrible and not. the excellent feature is indicative of positive reviews and the terrible feature is indicative of negative reviews. but in the presence of the not feature this categorization flips. one way to address this problem is by adding feature combinations. we could add two additional features excellent-and-not and terrible-and-not that indicate a conjunction of these base features. by assigning weights as follows you can achieve the desired effect wexecellent wexecllent-and-not wterrible wterrible-and-not wnot in this particular case we have addressed the problem. however if we start with d-many features if we want to add all pairs we ll blow features through this feature mapping. and up to there s no guarantee that pairs of features is enough. we might need features. these triples of features and now we re up to additional features will drastically increase computation and will often result in a stronger propensity to overfitting. in fact the xor problem is so significant that it basically killed research in classifiers with linear decision boundaries for a decade the perceptron figure picture of xor problem suppose that you took the xor problem and added one new feature logical and of the two existing features. write out feature weights and a bias that would achieve perfect classification on this data. a course in machine learning or two. later in this book we will see two alternative approaches to taking key ideas from the perceptron and generating classifiers with non-linear decision boundaries. one approach is to combine multiple perceptrons in a single framework this is the neural networks approach chapter the second approach is to find computationally efficient ways of doing feature mapping in a computationally and statistically efficient way this is the kernels approach chapter exercises exercise todo. practical issues learning objectives translate between a problem description and a concrete learning problem. perform basic feature engineering on image and text data. explain how to use cross-validation to tune hyperparameters and estimate future performance. compare and contrast the differences between several evaluation metrics. explain why feature combinations are important for learning with some models but not others. explain the relationship between the three learning techniques you have seen so far. apply several debugging techniques to learning algorithms. dependencies chapter in theory there is no difference between theory and practice. but in practice there is. jan l.a. van de snepscheut todo one two two examples per feature at this point you have seen three qualitatively different models for learning decision trees nearest neighbors and perceptrons. you have also learned about clustering with the k-means algorithm. you will shortly learn about more complex models most of which are variants on things you already know. however before attempting to understand more complex models of learning it is important to have a firm grasp on how to use machine learning in practice. this chapter is all about how to go from an abstract learning problem to a concrete implementation. you will see some examples of best practices along with justifications of these practices. in many ways going from an abstract problem to a concrete learn ing task is more of an art than a science. however this art can have a huge impact on the practical performance of learning systems. in many cases moving to a more complicated learning algorithm will gain you a few percent improvement. going to a better representation will gain you an order of magnitude improvement. to this end we will discuss several high level ideas to help you develop a better artistic sensibility. the importance of good features machine learning is magical. you give it data and it manages to classify that data. for many it can actually outperform a human! but like so many problems in the world there is a significant garbage in garbage out aspect to machine learning. if the data you give it is trash the learning algorithm is unlikely to be able to overcome it. with a pixel image a very easy feature representation of this image is as a dimensional vector where each dimension corresponds to the red green or blue component of some pixel in the image. so perhaps feature is the amount of red in pixel feature is the amount of green in that pixel and so on. this is the consider a problem of object recognition from images. if you start a course in machine learning pixel representation of images. one thing to keep in mind is that the pixel representation throws away all locality information in the image. learning algorithms don t care about features they only care about feature values. so i can permute all of the features with no effect on the learning algorithm long as i apply the same permutation to all training and test examples. figure shows some images whos pixels have been randomly permuted this case only the pixels are permuted not the colors. all of these objects are things that you ve seen plenty of examples of can you identify them? should you expect a machine to be able to? an alternative representation of images is the patch represen tation where the unit of interest is a small rectangular block of an image rather than a single pixel. again permuting the patches has no effect on the classifier. figure shows the same images in patch representation. can you identify them? a final representation is a shape representation. here we throw out all color and pixel information and simply provide a bounding polygon. figure shows the same images in this representation. is this now enough to identify them? not you can find the answers at the end of this chapter. in the context of text categorization instance the sentiment recognition task one standard representation is the bag of words representation. here we have one feature for each unique word that appears in a document. for the feature happy the feature value is the number of times that the word happy appears in the document. the bag of words representation throws away all position information. figure shows a bow representation for two documents one positive and one negative. can you tell which is which? irrelevant and redundant features one big difference between learning models is how robust they are to the addition of noisy or irrelevant features. intuitively an irrelevant feature is one that is completely uncorrelated with the prediction task. a feature f whose expectation does not depend on the label e f y e f might be irrelevant. for instance the presence of the word the might be largely irrelevant for predicting whether a course review is positive or negative. a secondary issue is how well these algorithms deal with redun dant features. two features are redundant if they are highly correlated regardless of whether they are correlated with the task or not. for example having a bright red pixel in an image at position is probably highly redundant with having a bright red pixel figure pracimagepix object recognition in pixels figure pracimagepatch object recognition in patches figure pracimageshape object recognition in shapes figure pracbow bow repr of one positive and one negative review is it possible to have a feature f practical issues you might think it s crazy to have so many irrelevant features but the cases you ve seen so far of words bag of pixels are both reasonable examples of this! how many words out of the entire english vocabulary words are actually useful for predicting positive and negative course reviews? at position both might be useful for identifying fire hydrants but because of how images are structured these two features are likely to co-occur frequently. when thinking about robustness to irrelevant or redundant fea tures it is usually not worthwhile thinking of the case where one has great features and bad feature. the interesting case is when the bad features outnumber the good features and often outnumber by a large degree. for instance perhaps the number of good features is something like log d out of a set of d total features. the question is how robust are algorithms in this for shallow decision trees the model explicitly selects features that are highly correlated with the label. in particular by limiting the depth of the decision tree one can at least hope that the model will be able to throw away irrelevant features. redundant features are almost certainly thrown out once you select one feature the second feature now looks mostly useless. the only possible issue with irrelevant features is that even though they re irrelevant they happen to correlate with the class label on the training data but chance. as a thought experiment suppose that we have n training ex amples and exactly half are positive examples and half are negative examples. suppose there s some binary feature f that is completely uncorrelated with the label. this feature has a chance of appearing in any example regardless of the label. in principle the decision tree should not select this feature. but by chance especially if n is small the feature might look correlated with the label. this is analogous to flipping two coins simultaneously n times. even though the coins are independent it s entirely possible that you will observe a sequence like h t h h which makes them look entirely correlated! the hope is that as n grows this becomes less and less likely. in fact we can explicitly compute how likely this is to happen. to do this let s fix the sequence of n labels. we now flip a coin n times and consider how likely it is that it exactly matches the label. this is easy the probability is now we would also be confused if it exactly matched not the label which has the same probability. so the chance that it looks perfectly correlated is thankfully this shrinks down very small after only data points. this makes us happy. the problem is that we don t have one irrelevant feature we have d log d irrelevant features! if we randomly pick two irrelevant feature values each has the same probability of perfectly correlating but since there are two and they re independent coins the chance that either correlates perfectly is in general if we have k irrelevant features all a course in machine learning of which are random independent coins the chance that at least one of them perfectly correlates is k. this suggests that if we have a sizeable number k of irrelevant features we d better have at least k training examples. unfortunately the situation is actually worse than this. in the above analysis we only considered the case of perfect correlation. we could also consider the case of partial correlation which would yield even higher probabilities. is left as exercise for those who want some practice with probabilistic analysis. suffice it to say that even decision trees can become confused. in the case of k-nearest neighbors the situation is perhaps more dire. since knn weighs each feature just as much as another feature the introduction of irrelevant features can completely mess up knn prediction. in fact as you saw in high dimensional space randomly distributed points all look approximately the same distance apart. if we add lots and lots of randomly distributed features to a data set then all distances still converge. this is shown experimentally in figure where we start with the digit categorization data and continually add irrelevant uniformly distributed features and generate a histogram of distances. eventually all distances converge. in the case of the perceptron one can hope that it might learn to assign zero weight to irrelevant features. for instance consider a binary feature is randomly one or zero independent of the label. if the perceptron makes just as many updates for positive examples as for negative examples there is a reasonable chance this feature weight will be zero. at the very least it should be small. to get a better practical sense of how sensitive these algorithms are to irrelevant features figure shows the test performance of the three algorithms with an increasing number of compltely noisy features. in all cases the hyperparameters were tuned on validation data. todo... feature pruning and normalization in text categorization problems some words simply do not appear very often. perhaps the word groovy appears in exactly one training document which is positive. is it really worth keeping this word around as a feature? it s a dangerous endeavor because it s hard to tell with just one training example if it is really correlated with the positive class or is it just noise. you could hope that your learning algorithm is smart enough to figure it out. or you could just remove it. that means that the learning algorithm won t have to figure it out and you ve reduced the number of dimensions you have so things should be more efficient and less scary. figure pracaddirel data from high dimensional warning interpolated what happens with the perceptron with truly redundant features one is literally a copy of the other? figure pracnoisy dtknnperc on increasing amounts of noise this is typically positive indicator or at least it was back in the us in the practical issues figure according to google the following words many others appear times on the web moudlings agaggagctg setgravity rogov prosomeric spunlaid piyushtwok telelesson nesmysl brighnasa. for comparison the word the appears billion times. figure pracvariance effect of pruning on vision earlier we discussed the problem of scale of features millimeters versus centimeters. does this have an impact on variance-based feature pruning? math review data statistics means and variances data mean variance moments expectations etc... this idea of feature pruning is very useful and applied in many applications. it is easiest in the case of binary features. if a binary feature only appears some small number k times the training data no fair looking at the test data! you simply remove it from consideration. might also want to remove features that appear in all-but-k many documents for instance the word the appears in pretty much every english document ever written. typical choices for k are mostly depending on the size of the data. on a text data set with documents a cutoff of is probably reasonable. on a text data set the size of the web a cut of of or even or is probably figure shows the effect of pruning on a sentiment analysis task. in the beginning pruning does not hurt sometimes helps! but eventually we prune away all the interesting words and performance suffers. in the case of real-valued features the question is how to extend the idea of does not occur much to real values. a reasonable definition is to look for features with low variance. in fact for binary features ones that almost never appear or almost always appear will also have low variance. figure shows the result of pruning lowvariance features on the digit recognition task. again at first pruning does not hurt sometimes helps! but eventually we have thrown out all the useful features. once you have pruned away irrelevant features it is often useful to normalize the data so that it is consistent in some way. there are two basic types of normalization feature normalization and example normalization. in feature normalization you go through each feature and adjust it the same way across all examples. in example normalization each example is adjusted individually. the goal of both types of normalization is to make it easier for your learning algorithm to learn. in feature normalization there are two standard things to do centering moving the entire data set so that it is centered around the origin. scaling rescaling each feature so that one of the following holds each feature has variance across the training data. each feature has maximum absolute value across the train ing data. a course in machine learning these transformations are shown geometrically in figure the goal of centering is to make sure that no features are arbitrarily large. the goal of scaling is to make sure that all features have roughly the same scale avoid the issue of centimeters versus millimeters. these computations are fairly straightforward. here xnd refers to the dth feature of example n. since it is very rare to apply scaling without previously applying centering the expressions below for scaling assume that the data is already centered. for the three models you know about dt perceptron which are most sensitive to centering? which are most sensitive to scaling? centering variance scaling absolute scaling where xnd xnd d xnd xnd d xnd xndrd xnd d n n d n rd max n n in practice if the dynamic range of your features is already some subset of or then it is probably not worth the effort of centering and scaling. s an effort because you have to keep around your centering and scaling calculations so that you can apply them to the test data as well! however if some of your features are orders of magnitude larger than others it might be helpful. remember that you might know best if the difference in scale is actually significant for your problem then rescaling might throw away useful information. one thing to be wary of is centering binary data. in many cases binary data is very sparse for a given example only a few of the features are on. for instance out of a vocabulary of or words a given document probably only contains about from a storage and computation perspective this is very useful. however after centering the data will no longer sparse and you will pay dearly with outrageously slow implementations. in example normalization you view examples one at a time. the most standard normalization is to ensure that the length of each example vector is one namely each example lies somewhere on the unit hypersphere. this is a simple transformation example normalization xn xn figure pracexnorm example of example normalization this transformation is depicted in figure the main advantage to example normalization is that it makes comparisons more straightforward across data sets. if i hand you practical issues figure pracdttoperc turning a dt into a set of meta features figure praclog performance on text categ with word counts versus log word counts two data sets that differ only in the norm of the feature vectors one is just a scaled version of the other it is difficult to compare the learned models. example normalization makes this more straightforward. moreover as you saw in the perceptron convergence proof it is often just mathematically easier to assume normalized data. combinatorial feature explosion you learned in chapter that linear models the perceptron cannot solve the xor problem. you also learned that by performing a combinatorial feature explosion they could. but that came at the computational expense of gigantic feature vectors. of the algorithms that you ve seen so far the perceptron is the one that has the most to gain by feature combination. and the decision tree is the one that has the least to gain. in fact the decision tree construction is essentially building meta features for you. at least it is building meta features constructed purely through logical ands. this observation leads to a heuristic for constructing meta features for perceptrons from decision trees. the idea is to train a decision tree on the training data. from that decision tree you can extract meta features by looking at feature combinations along branches. you can then add only those feature combinations as meta features to the feature set for the perceptron. figure shows a small decision tree and a set of meta features that you might extract from it. there is a hyperparameter here of what length paths to extract from the tree in this case only paths of length two are extracted. for bigger trees or if you have more data you might benefit from longer paths. in addition to combinatorial transformations the logarithmic transformation can be quite useful in practice. it seems like a strange thing to be useful since it doesn t seem to fundamentally change the data. however since many learning algorithms operate by linear operations on the features perceptron and knn do this the log-transform is a way to get product-like operations. the question is which of the following feels more applicable to your data every time this feature increases by one i m equally more likely to predict a positive label every time this feature doubles i m equally more like to predict a positive label. in the first case you should stick with linear features and in the second case you should switch to a log-transform. this is an important transformation in text data where the presence of the word excellent once is a good indicator of a positive review seeing excellent twice is a better indicator but the difference between seeing excellent times and seeing it times really isn t a big deal any more. a log-transform achieves a course in machine learning this. experimentally you can see the difference in test performance between word count data and log-word count data in figure here the transformation is actually xd to ensure that zeros remain zero and sparsity is retained. evaluating model performance so far our focus has been on classifiers that achieve high accuracy. in some cases this is not what you might want. for instance if you are trying to predict whether a patient has cancer or not it might be better to err on one side they have cancer when they don t than the other then they die. similarly letting a little spam slip through might be better than accidentally blocking one email from your boss. there are two major types of binary classification problems. one is x versus y. for instance positive versus negative sentiment. another is x versus not-x. for instance spam versus non-spam. argument being that there are lots of types of non-spam. or in the context of web search relevant document versus irrelevant document. this is a subtle and subjective decision. but x versus notx problems often have more of the feel of x spotting rather than a true distinction between x and y. you spot the spam? can you spot the relevant documents? for spotting problems versus not-x there are often more appropriate success metrics than accuracy. a very popular one from information retrieval is the precisionrecall metric. precision asks the question of all the x s that you found how many of them were actually x s? recall asks of all the x s that were out there how many of them did you formally precision and recall are defined as p r i s i t s number of xs that your system found t number of xs in the data i number of correct xs that your system found here s is mnemonic for system t is mnemonic for truth and i is mnemonic for intersection. it is generally accepted that in these definitions. thus if you system found nothing your precision is always perfect and if there is nothing to find your recall is always perfect. once you can compute precision and recall you are often able to produce precisionrecall curves. suppose that you are attempting a colleague make the analogy to the us court system s saying do you promise to tell the whole truth and nothing but the truth? in this case the whole truth means high recall and nothing but the truth means high precision. figure pracspam show a bunch of emails spamnospam sorted by model predicion not perfect practical issues how would you get a confidence out of a decision tree or knn? figure pracprcurve precision recall curve table table of f-measures when varying precision and recall values. to identify spam. you run a learning algorithm to make predictions on a test set. but instead of just taking a yesno answer you allow your algorithm to produce its confidence. for instance in perceptron you might use the distance from the hyperplane as a confidence measure. you can then sort all of your test emails according to this ranking. you may put the most spam-like emails at the top and the least spam-like emails at the bottom like in figure once you have this sorted list you can choose how aggressively you want your spam filter to be by setting a threshold anywhere on this list. one would hope that if you set the threshold very high you are likely to have high precision low recall. if you set the threshold very low you ll have high recall low precision. by considering every possible place you could put this threshold you can trace out a curve of precisionrecall values like the one in figure this allows us to ask the question for some fixed precision what sort of recall can i get. obviously the closer your curve is to the upper-right corner the better. and when comparing learning algorithms a and b you can say that a dominates b if a s precisionrecall curve is always higher than b s. precisionrecall curves are nice because they allow us to visualize many ways in which we could use the system. however sometimes we like to have a single number that informs us of the quality of the solution. a popular way of combining precision and recall into a single number is by taking their harmonic mean. this is known as the balanced f-measure f-score f p r p r the reason that you want to use a harmonic mean rather than an arithmetic mean one you re more used to is that it favors systems that achieve roughly equal precision and recall. in the extreme case where p r then f p r. but in the imbalanced case for instance p and r the overall f-measure is a modest table shows f-measures as a function of precision and recall so that you can see how important it is to get balanced values. in some cases you might believe that precision is more important than recall. this idea leads to the weighted f-measure which is parameterized by a weight f p r p r for this reduces to the standard f-measure. for it focuses entirely on recall and for it focuses entirely on precision. the interpretation of the weight is that f measures the perfor a course in machine learning mance for a user who cares times as much about precision as about recall. one thing to keep in mind is that precision and recall hence f-measure depend crucially on which class is considered the thing you wish to find. in particular if you take a binary data set if flip what it means to be a positive or negative example you will end up with completely difference precision and recall values. it is not the case that precision on the flipped task is equal to recall on the original task vice versa. consequently f-measure is also not the same. for some tasks where people are less sure about what they want they will occasionally report two sets of precisionrecallfmeasure numbers which vary based on which class is considered the thing to spot. there are other standard metrics that are used in different communities. for instance the medical community is fond of the sensitivityspecificity metric. a sensitive classifier is one which almost always finds everything it is looking for it has high recall. in fact sensitivity is exactly the same as recall. a specific classifier is one which does a good job not finding the things that it doesn t want to find. specificity is precision on the negation of the task at hand. you can compute curves for sensitivity and specificity much like those for precision and recall. the typical plot referred to as the receiver operating characteristic roc curve plots the sensitivity against specificity. given an roc curve you can compute the area under the curve auc metric which also provides a meaningful single number for a system s performance. unlike f-measures which tend to be low because the require agreement auc scores tend to be very high even for not great systems. this is because random chance will give you an auc of and the best possible auc is the main message for evaluation metrics is that you should choose whichever one makes the most sense. in many cases several might make sense. in that case you should do whatever is more commonly done in your field. there is no reason to be an outlier without cause. cross validation in chapter you learned about using development data held-out data to set hyperparameters. the main disadvantage to the development data approach is that you throw out some of your training data just for estimating one or two hyperparameters. an alternative is the idea of cross validation. in cross validation you break your training data up into equally-sized partitions. you train a learning algorithm on of them and test it on the remaining practical issues algorithm crossvalidatelearningalgorithm data k unknown for all hyperparameter settings do store lowest error encountered so far store the hyperparameter setting that yielded it keep track of the k-many error estimates err for k to k do train yn data n mod k k test yn data n mod k k test every kth example model run learningalgorithm on train err err error of model on test add current error to list of errors end for avgerr mean of set err if avgerr then avgerr remember these settings because they re the best so far end if end for you do this times each time holding out a different partition as the development part. you can then average your performance over all ten parts to get an estimate of how well your model will perform in the future. you can repeat this process for every possible choice of hyperparameters to get an estimate of which one performs best. the general k-fold cross validation technique is shown in algorithm where k in the preceeding discussion. in fact the development data approach can be seen as an approximation to cross validation wherein only one of the k loops in algorithm is executed. typical choices for k are and n by far the most com mon is k cross validation. sometimes is used for efficiency reasons. and sometimes is used for subtle statistical reasons but that is quite rare. in the case that k n this is known as leave-one-out cross validation abbreviated as loo cross validation. after running cross validation you have two choices. you can either select one of the k trained models as your final model to make predictions with or you can train a new model on all of the data using the hyperparameters selected by cross-validation. if you have the time the latter is probably a better options. it may seem that loo cross validation is prohibitively expensive to run. this is true for most learning algorithms except for k-nearest neighbors. for knn leave-one-out is actually very natural. we loop through each training point and ask ourselves whether this example would be correctly classified for all different possible values of k. this requires only as much computation as computing the k nearest neighbors for the highest value of k. this is such a popular and effective approach for knn classification that it is spelled out in a course in machine learning algorithm knn-train-lood errk k n for n to n do sm xm m n s sorts y for k to n do sk y y ym if y ym then errk errk end if end for end for return argmink errk errk stores how well you do with knn compute distances to other points put lowest-distance objects first current label prediction let kth closest point vote one more error for knn return the k that achieved lowest error algorithm overall the main advantage to cross validation over develop ment data is robustness. the main advantage of development data is speed. one warning to keep in mind is that the goal of both cross validation and development data is to estimate how well you will do in the future. this is a question of statistics and holds only if your test data really looks like your training data. that is it is drawn from the same distribution. in many practical cases this is not entirely true. for example in person identification we might try to classify every pixel in an image based on whether it contains a person or not. if we have training images each with pixels then we have a total of training examples. the classification for a pixel in image is highly dependent on the classification for a neighboring pixel in the same image. so if one of those pixels happens to fall in training data and the other in development cross validation data your model will do unreasonably well. in this case it is important that when you cross validate use development data you do so over images not over pixels. the same goes for text problems where you sometimes want to classify things at a word level but are handed a collection of documents. the important thing to keep in mind is that it is the images documents that are drawn independently from your data distribution and not the pixels words which are drawn dependently. practical issues hypothesis testing and statistical significance vignette the lady drinking tea story suppose that you ve presented a machine learning solution to your boss that achieves error on cross validation. your nemesis gabe gives a solution to your boss that achieves error on cross validation. how impressed should your boss be? it depends. if this improvement was measured over examples perhaps not too impressed. it would mean that gabe got exactly one more example right than you did. fact he probably got more right and more wrong. if this impressed was measured over examples perhaps this is more impressive. this is one of the most fundamental questions in statistics. you have a scientific hypothesis of the form gabe s algorithm is better than mine. you wish to test whether this hypothesis is true. you are testing it against the null hypothesis which is that gabe s algorithm is no better than yours. you ve collected data or data points to measure the strength of this hypothesis. you want to ensure that the difference in performance of these two algorithms is statistically significant i.e. is probably not just due to random luck. more common question statisticians ask is whether one drug treatment is better than another where another is either a placebo or the competitor s drug. there are about ways of doing hypothesis testing. like evaluation metrics and the number of folds of cross validation this is something that is very discipline specific. here we will discuss two popular tests the paired t-test and bootstrapping. these tests and other statistical tests have underlying assumptions instance assumptions about the distribution of observations and strengths instance small or large samples. in most cases the goal of hypothesis testing is to compute a p-value namely the probability that the observed difference in performance was by chance. the standard way of reporting results is to say something like there is a chance that this difference was not by chance. the value is arbitrary and occasionally people use weaker test or stronger tests. the t-test is an example of a parametric test. it is applicable when the null hypothesis states that the difference between two responses has mean zero and unknown variance. the t-test actually assumes that data is distributed according to a gaussian distribution which is a course in machine learning probably not true of binary responses. fortunately for large samples least a few hundred binary seamples are well approximated by a gaussian distribution. so long as your sample is sufficiently large the t-test is reasonable either for regression or classification problems. suppose that you evaluate two algorithm on n-many examples. on each example you can compute whether the algorithm made the correct prediction. let an denote the error of the first algorithm on each example. let bn denote the error of the second algorithm. you can compute a and b as the means of a and b respecitively. finally center the data as a a a and b b b. the t-statistic is defined as t a b nn n an t significance table table of significance values for the t-test. after computing the t-value you can compare it to a list of values for computing confidence intervals. assuming you have a lot of data is a few hundred or more then you can compare your t-value to table to determine the significance level of the difference. one disadvantage to the t-test is that it cannot easily be applied to evaluation metrics like f-score. this is because f-score is a computed over an entire test set and does not decompose into a set of individual errors. this means that the t-test cannot be applied. fortunately cross validation gives you a way around this problem. what does it mean for the means a and b to become further apart? how does this affect the t-value? what happens if the variance of a increases? when you do k-fold cross validation you are able to compute k error metrics over the same data. for example you might run cross validation and compute f-score for every fold. perhaps the fscores are and this gives you an average f-score of over the folds. the standard deviation of this set of f-scores is n n you can now assume that the distribution of scores is approximately gaussian. if this is true then approximately of the probability mass lies in the range lies in the range and lies in the range so if we were comparing our algorithm against one whose average f-score was we could be certain that our superior performance was not due to warning a confidence of does not mean there is a chance that i am better. all it means is that if i reran the same ex had we run cross validation we might be been able to get tighter confidence intervals. practical issues algorithm bootstrapevaluatey y numfolds scores for k to numfolds do truth pred for n to n do m uniform random value from to n truth truth ym pred pred ym list of values we want to predict list of values we actually predicted sample a test point add on the truth add on our prediction evaluate end for scores scores f-scoretruth pred end for return stddevscores periment times then in of those experiments i would still win. these are very different statements. if you say the first one people who know about statistics will get very mad at you! one disadvantage to cross validation is that it is computationally expensive. more folds typically leads to better estimates but every new fold requires training a new classifier. this can get very time consuming. the technique of bootstrapping closely related idea of jack-knifing can address this problem. suppose that you didn t want to run cross validation. all you have is a single held-out test set with data points in it. you can run your classifier and get predictions on these data points. you would like to be able to compute a metric like f-score on this test set but also get confidence intervals. the idea behind bootstrapping is that this set of is a random draw from some distribution. we would like to get multiple random draws from this distribution on which to evaluate. we can simulate multiple draws by repeatedly subsampling from these examples with replacement. to perform a single bootstrap you will sample random points from your test set of random points. this sampling must be done with replacement that the same example can be sampled more than once otherwise you ll just end up with your original test set. this gives you a bootstrapped sample. on this sample you can compute f-score whatever metric you want. you then do this more times to get a bootstrap. for each bootstrapped sample you will be a different f-score. the mean and standard deviation of this set of f-scores can be used to estimate a confidence interval for your algorithm. the bootstrap resampling procedure is sketched in algorithm this takes three arguments the true labels y the predicted labels y and the number of folds to run. it returns the mean and standard deviation from which you can compute a confidence interval. a course in machine learning debugging learning algorithms learning algorithms are notoriously hard to debug as you may have already experienced if you have implemented any of the models presented so far. the main issue is that when a learning algorithm doesn t learn it s unclear if this is because there s a bug or because the learning problem is too hard there s too much noise or moreover sometimes bugs lead to learning algorithms performing better than they should these are especially hard to catch always a bit disappointing when you do catch them. obviously if you have a reference implementation you can at tempt to match its output. otherwise there are two things you can do to try to help debug. the first is to do everything in your power to get the learning algorithm to overfit. if it cannot at least overfit the training data there s definitely something wrong. the second is to feed it some tiny hand-specified two dimensional data set on which you know what it should do and you can plot the output. the easiest way to try to get a learning algorithm to overfit is to add a new feature to it. you can call this feature the cheatingisfun the feature value associated with this feature is if this is a positive example and zero if this is a negative example. in other words this feature is a perfect indicator of the class of this example. if you add the cheatingisfun feature and your algorithm does not get near training error this could be because there are too many noisy features confusing it. you could either remove a lot of the other features or make the feature value for cheatingisfun either or so that the algorithm really looks at it. if you do this and your algorithm still cannot overfit then you likely have a bug. to remove the cheatingisfun feature from your final implementation! a second thing to try is to hand-craft a data set on which you know your algorithm should work. this is also useful if you ve managed to get your model to overfit and have simply noticed that it does not generalize. for instance you could run knn on the xor data. or you could run perceptron on some easily linearly separable data instance positive points along the line and negative points along the line or a decision tree on nice axis-aligned data. when debugging on hand-crafted data remember whatever you know about the models you are considering. for instance you know that the perceptron should converge on linearly separable data so try it on a linearly separable data set. you know that decision trees should do well on data with only a few relevant features so make note cheating is actually not fun and you shouldn t do it! practical issues your label some easy combination of features such as y you know that knn should work well on data sets where the classes are well separated so try such data sets. the most important thing to keep in mind is that a lot goes in to getting good test set performance. first the model has to be right for the data. so crafting your own data is helpful. second the model has to fit the training data well so try to get it to overfit. third the model has to generalize so make sure you tune hyperparameters well. todo answers to image questions exercises exercise todo. figure pracimageanswers object recognition answers beyond binary classification learning objectives represent complex prediction prob lems in a formal learning setting. be able to artifically balance imbalanced data. understand the positive and negative aspects of several reductions from multiclass classification to binary classification. recognize the difference between regression and ordinal regression. implement stacking as a method of collective classification. dependencies in the preceeding chapters you have learned all about a very simple form of prediction predicting bits. in the real world however we often need to predict much more complex objects. you may need to categorize a document into one of several categories sports entertainment news politics etc. you may need to rank web pages or ads based on relevance to a query. you may need to simultaneously classify a collection of objects such as web pages that have important information in the links between them. these problems are all commonly encountered yet fundamentally more complex than binary classification. in this chapter you will learn how to use everything you already know about binary classification to solve these more complicated problems. you will see that it s relatively easy to think of a binary classifier as a black box which you can reuse for solving these more complex problems. this is a very useful abstraction since it allows us to reuse knowledge rather than having to build new learning models and algorithms from scratch. learning with imbalanced data your boss tells you to build a classifier that can identify fraudulent transactions in credit card histories. fortunately most transactions are legitimate so perhaps only of the data is a positive instance. the imbalanced data problem refers to the fact that for a large number of real world problems the number of positive examples is dwarfed by the number of negative examples vice versa. this is actually something of a misnomer it is not the data that is imbalanced but the distribution from which the data is drawn. since the distribution is imbalanced so must the data be. imbalanced data is a problem because machine learning algorithms are too smart for your own good. for most learning algorithms if you give them data that is negative and positive they will simply learn to always predict negative. why? because beyond binary classification they are trying to minimize error and they can achieve error by doing nothing! if a teacher told you to study for an exam with truefalse questions and only one of them is true it is unlikely you will study very long. really the problem is not with the data but rather with the way that you have defined the learning problem. that is to say what you care about is not accuracy you care about something else. if you want a learning algorithm to do a reasonable job you have to tell it what you want! most likely what you want is not to optimize accuracy but rather to optimize some other measure like f-score or auc. you want your algorithm to make some positive predictions and simply prefer those to be good. we will shortly discuss two heuristics for dealing with this problem subsampling and weighting. in subsampling you throw out some of you negative examples so that you are left with a balanced data set positive negative. this might scare you a bit since throwing out data seems like a bad idea but at least it makes learning much more efficient. in weighting instead of throwing out positive examples we just given them lower weight. if you assign an importance weight of to each of the positive examples then there will be as much weight associated with positive examples as negative examples. before formally defining these heuristics we need to have a mech anism for formally defining supervised learning problems. we will proceed by example using binary classification as the canonical learning problem. task binary classification given an input space x an unknown distribution d over x compute a function f minimizing e f as in all the binary classification examples you ve seen you have some input space has always been rd. there is some distribution that produces labeled examples over the input space. you do not have access to that distribution but can obtain samples from it. your goal is to find a classifier that minimizes error on that distribution. a small modification on this definition gives a classification problem where you believe that the positive class is as a course in machine learning algorithm subsamplemapdweighted while true do y dweighted u uniform random variable in if y or u return y then draw an example from the weighted distribution end if end while important as the negative class. task binary classification given an input space x an unknown distribution d over x compute a function f minimizing e d f the objects given to you in weighted binary classification are iden tical to standard binary classification. the only difference is that the cost of misprediction for y is while the cost of misprediction for y is in what follows we assume that if it is not you can simply swap the labels and use the question we will ask is suppose that i have a good algorithm for solving the binary classification problem. can i turn that into a good algorithm for solving the binary classification problem? in order to do this you need to define a transformation that maps a concrete weighted problem into a concrete unweighted problem. this transformation needs to happen both at training time and at test time it need not be the same transformation!. algorithm sketches a training-time sub-sampling transformation and algorithm sketches a test-time transformation in this case is trivial. all the training algorithm is doing is retaining all positive examples and a fraction of all negative examples. the algorithm is explicitly turning the distribution over weighted examples into a distribution over binary examples. a vanilla binary classifier is trained on this induced distribution. aside from the fact that this algorithm throws out a lot of data for large it does seem to be doing a reasonable thing. in fact from a reductions perspective it is an optimal algorithm. you can prove the following result beyond binary classification why is it unreasonable to expect to be able to achieve for instance an error of sublinear in or anything that is theorem optimality. suppose the binary classifier trained in algorithm achieves a binary error rate of then the error rate of the weighted predictor is equal to this theorem states that if your binary classifier does well the induced distribution then the learned predictor will also do well the original distribution. thus we have successfully converted a weighted learning problem into a plain classification problem! the fact that the error rate of the weighted predictor is exactly times more than that of the unweighted predictor is unavoidable the error metric on which it is evaluated is times bigger! the proof of this theorem is so straightforward that we will prove it here. it simply involves some algebra on expected values. proof of theorem let dw be the original distribution and let db be the induced distribution. let f be the binary classifier trained on data from db that achieves a binary error rate of on that distribution. we will compute the expected error of f on the weighted problem f dwx y f f dwx f f dbx f f dw y e x x x x x x db e and we re done! implicitly assumed x is discrete. in the case of continuous data you need to replace all the sums over x with integrals over x but the result still holds. instead of subsampling the low-cost class you could alternatively oversample the high-cost class. the easiest case is when is an integer say now whenever you get a positive point you include copies of it in the induced distribution. whenever you get a negative point you include a single copy. this oversampling algorithm achieves exactly the same theoretical result as the subsampling algorithm. the main advantage to the oversampling algorithm is that it does not throw out any data. the main advantage to the subsampling algorithm is that it is more computationally efficient. how can you handle non-integral for instance modify the proof of optimality for the subsampling algorithm so that it applies to the oversampling algorithm. a course in machine learning you might be asking yourself intuitively the oversampling algo rithm seems like a much better idea than the subsampling algorithm at least if you don t care about computational efficiency. but the theory tells us that they are the same! what is going on? of course the theory isn t wrong. it s just that the assumptions are effectively different in the two cases. both theorems state that if you can get error of on the binary problem you automatically get error of on the weighted problem. but they do not say anything about how possible it is to get error on the binary problem. since the oversampling algorithm produces more data points than the subsampling algorithm it is very concievable that you could get lower binary error with oversampling than subsampling. the primary drawback to oversampling is computational ineffi ciency. however for many learning algorithms it is straightforward to include weighted copies of data points at no cost. the idea is to store only the unique data points and maintain a counter saying how many times they are replicated. this is not easy to do for the perceptron can be done but takes work but it is easy for both decision trees and knn. for example for decision trees algorithm the only changes are to ensure that line computes the most frequent weighted answer and change lines and to compute weighted errors. multiclass classification multiclass classification is a natural extension of binary classification. the goal is still to assign a discrete label to examples instance is a document about entertainment sports finance or world news?. the difference is that you have k classes to choose from. task multiclass classification given an input space x and number of classes k an unknown distribution d over x compute a function f minimizing e f note that this is identical to binary classification except for the presence of k classes. the above k. in fact if you set k you exactly recover binary classification. the game we play is the same someone gives you a binary classifier and you have to use it to solve the multiclass classification prob why is it hard to change the perceptron? it has to do with the fact that perceptron is online. how would you modify knn to take into account weights? beyond binary classification algorithm oneversusalltraindmulticlass binarytrain for i to k do dbin relabel dmulticlass so class i is positive and i is negative fi binarytraindbin end for return fk algorithm oneversusalltest fk x score for i to k do y fi x scorei scorei y end for return argmaxk scorek initialize k-many scores to zero lem. a very common approach is the one versus all technique called ova or one versus rest. to perform ova you train k-many binary classifiers fk. each classifier sees all of the training data. classifier fi receives all examples labeled class i as positives and all other examples as negatives. at test time whichever classifier predicts positive wins with ties broken randomly. the training and test algorithms for ova are sketched in algo rithms and in the testing procedure the prediction of the ith classifier is added to the overall score for class i. thus if the prediction is positive class i gets a vote if the prdiction is negative everyone else gets a vote. fact if your learning algorithm can output a confidence as discussed in section you can often do better by using the confidence as y rather than a simple ova is very natural easy to implement and quite natural. it also works very well in practice so long as you do a good job choosing a good binary classification algorithm tuning its hyperparameters well. its weakness is that it can be somewhat brittle. intuitively it is not particularly robust to errors in the underlying classifiers. if one classifier makes a mistake it eis possible that the entire prediction is erroneous. in fact it is entirely possible that none of the k classifiers predicts positive is actually the worst-case scenario from a theoretical perspective! this is made explicit in the ova error bound below. theorem error bound. suppose the average binary error of the k binary classifiers is then the error rate of the ova multiclass predictor is at most proof of theorem the key question is erroneous predictions from the binary classifiers lead to multiclass errors. we break it down into false negatives when the truth is and false positives suppose that you have n data points in k classes evenly divided. how long does it take to train an ova classifier if the base binary classifier takes on time to train? what if the base classifier takes time? why would using a confidence help. a course in machine learning when the truth is when a false negative occurs then the testing procedure chooses randomly between available options which is all labels. this gives a probability of multiclass error. since only one binary error is necessary to make this happen the efficiency of this error mode is multiple false positives can occur simultaneously. suppose there are m false positives. if there is simultaneously a false negative the error is in order for this to happen there have to be m errors so the efficiency is in the case that there is not a simultaneous false negative the error probability is mm this requires m errors leading to an efficiency of the worse case therefore is the false negative case which gives an efficiency of since we have k-many opportunities to err we multiply this by k and get a bound of the constants in this are relatively unimportant the aspect that matters is that this scales linearly in k. that is as the number of classes grows so does your expected error. to develop alternative approaches a useful way to think about turning multiclass classification problems into binary classification problems is to think of them like tournaments soccer aka football cricket tennis or whatever appeals to you. you have k teams entering a tournament but unfortunately the sport they are playing only allows two to compete at a time. you want to set up a way of pairing the teams and having them compete so that you can figure out which team is best. in learning the teams are now the classes and you re trying to figure out which class is one natural approach is to have every team compete against ev ery other team. the team that wins the majority of its matches is declared the winner. this is the all versus all ava approach called all pairs. the most natural way to think about it classifiers. say fij for i j k is the classifier is as training that pits class i against class j. this classifier receives all of the class i examples as positive and all of the class j examples as negative. when a test point arrives it is run through all fij classifiers. every time fij predicts positive class i gets a point otherwise class j gets a point. after running all classifiers the class with the most votes wins. the training and test algorithms for ava are sketched in algo rithms and in theory the ava mapping is more complicated than the weighted binary case. the result is stated below but the proof is omitted. theorem error bound. suppose the average binary error of the sporting analogy breaks down a bit for ova k games are played wherein each team will play simultaneously against all other teams. suppose that you have n data points in k classes evenly divided. how long does it take to train an ava classifier if the base binary classifier takes on time to train? what if the base classifier takes time? how does this compare to ova? beyond binary classification algorithm allversusalltraindmulticlass binarytrain fij i j k for i to do dpos all x dmulticlass labeled i for j to k do dneg all x dmulticlass labeled j dbin x dpos x dneg fij binarytraindbin end for end for return all fijs algorithm allversusalltestall fij x score for i to do initialize k-many scores to zero for j to k do y fij x scorei scorei y scorej scorej y end for end for return argmaxk scorek binary classifiers is then the error rate of the ava multiclass the predictor is at most at this point you might be wondering if it s possible to do better than something linear in k. fortunately the answer is yes! the solution like so much in computer science is divide and conquer. the idea is to construct a binary tree of classifiers. the leaves of this tree correspond to the k labels. since there are only k decisions made to get from the root to a leaf then there are only k chances to make an error. an example of a classification tree for k classes is shown in figure at the root you distinguish between classes and classes this means that you will train a binary classifier whose positive examples are all data points with multiclass label and whose negative examples are all data points with multiclass label based on what decision is made by this classifier you can walk down the appropriate path in the tree. when k is not a powwr of the tree will not be full. this classification tree algorithm achieves the following bound. theorem error bound. suppose the average binary classifiers error is then the error rate of the tree classifier is at most proof of theorem a multiclass error is made if any classifier on the bound for ava is the bound for ova is does this mean that ova is necessarily better than ava? why or why not? figure data set on which ova will do terribly with linear classifiers consider the data in figure and assume that you are using a perceptron as the base classifier. how well will ova do on this data? what about ava? a course in machine learning the path from the root to the correct leaf makes an error. each has probability of making an error and the path consists of at most binary decisions. one think to keep in mind with tree classifiers is that you have control over how the tree is defined. in ova and ava you have no say in what classification problems are created. in tree classifiers the only thing that matters is that at the root half of the classes are considered positive and half are considered negative. you want to split the classes in such a way that this classification decision is as easy as possible. you can use whatever you happen to know about your classification problem to try to separate the classes out in a reasonable way. can you do better than it turns out the answer is yes but the algorithms to do so are relatively complicated. you can actually do as well as using the idea of error-correcting tournaments. moreover you can prove a lower bound that states that the best you could possible do is this means that error-correcting tournaments are at most a factor of four worse than optimal. ranking you start a new web search company called goohooing. like other search engines a user inputs a query and a set of documents is retrieved. your goal is to rank the resulting documents based on relevance to the query. the ranking problem is to take a collection of items and sort them according to some notion of preference. one of the trickiest parts of doing ranking through learning is to properly define the loss function. toward the end of this section you will see a very general loss function but before that let s consider a few special cases. continuing the web search example you are given a collection of queries. for each query you are also given a collection of documents together with a desired ranking over those documents. in the following we ll assume that you have n-many queries and for each query you have m-many documents. practice m will probably vary by query but for ease we ll consider the simplified case. the goal is to train a binary classifier to predict a preference function. given a query q and two documents di and dj the classifier should predict whether di should be preferred to dj with respect to the query q. as in all the previous examples there are two things we have to take care of how to train the classifier that predicts preferences how to turn the predicted preferences into a ranking. unlike the previous examples the second step is somewhat complicated in the beyond binary classification algorithm naiveranktrainrankingdata binarytrain d for n to n do for all i j to m and i j do if i is prefered to j on query n then d d d d else if j is prefered to i on query n then end if end for end for return binarytraind algorithm naiveranktest f x score for all i j to m and i j do y f xij scorei scorei y scorej scorej y end for return argsortscore initialize m-many scores to zero get predicted ranking of i and j return queries sorted by score ranking case. this is because we need to predict an entire ranking of a large number of documents somehow assimilating the preference function into an overall permutation. for notationally simplicity let xnij denote the features associated with comparing document i to document j on query n. training is fairly straightforward. for every n and every pair i j we will create a binary classification example based on features xnij. this example is positive if i is preferred to j in the true ranking. it is negative if j is preferred to i. some cases the true ranking will not express a preference between two objects in which case we exclude the i j and j i pair from training. now you might be tempted to evaluate the classification perfor mance of this binary classifier on its own. the problem with this approach is that it s impossible to tell just by looking at its output on one i j pair how good the overall ranking is. this is because there is the intermediate step of turning these pairwise predictions into a coherent ranking. what you need to do is measure how well the ranking based on your predicted preferences compares to the true ordering. algorithms and show naive algorithms for training and testing a ranking function. these algorithms actually work quite well in the case of bipartite ranking problems. a bipartite ranking problem is one in which you are only ever trying to predict a binary response for instance is this a course in machine learning document relevant or not? but are being evaluated according to a metric like auc. this is essentially because the only goal in bipartite problems to to ensure that all the relevant documents are ahead of all the irrelevant documents. there is no notion that one relevant document is more relevant than another. for non-bipartite ranking problems you can do better. first when the preferences that you get at training time are more nuanced than relevant or not you can incorporate these preferences at training time. effectively you want to give a higher weight to binary problems that are very different in terms of perference than others. second rather than producing a list of scores and then calling an arbitrary sorting algorithm you can actually use the preference function as the sorting function inside your own implementation of quicksort. we can now formalize the problem. define a ranking as a function that maps the objects we are ranking to the desired position in the list m. if u v then u is preferred to v appears earlier on the ranked document list. given data with observed rankings our goal is to learn to predict rankings for new objects we define m as the set of all ranking functions over m objects. we also wish to express the fact that making a mistake on some pairs is worse than making a mistake on others. this will be encoded in a cost function where j is the cost for accidentally putting something in position j when it should have gone in position i. to be a valid cost function valid must be symmetric monotonic and satisfy the triangle inequality. namely j i if i j k or i j k then j k j k k. with these definitions we can properly define the ranking problem. task given an input space x an unknown distribution d over x m compute a function f x m minimizing e d u v v u u v where f in this definition the only complex aspect is the loss function this loss sums over all pairs of objects u and v. if the true ranking beyond binary classification algorithm ranktraindrank binarytrain dbin for all drank do for all u v do y sign v u w u v dbin dbin w xuv end for end for return binarytraindbin y is if u is prefered to v w is the cost of misclassification prefers u to v but the predicted ranking prefers v to u then you incur a cost of u v. depending on the problem you care about you can set to many standard options. if j whenever i j then you achieve the kemeny distance measure which simply counts the number of pairwise misordered items. in many applications you may only care about getting the top k predictions correct. for instance your web search algorithm may only display k results to a user. in this case you can define j if mini j k and i j otherwise in this case only errors in the top k elements are penalized. swapping items and is irrelevant k finally in the bipartite ranking case you can express the area under the curve metric as j mm m if i m and j m if j m and i m otherwise here m is the total number of objects to be ranked and m is the number that are actually good. m m is the number that are actually bad since this is a bipartite problem. you are only penalized if you rank a good item in position greater than m or if you rank a bad item in a position less than or equal to m. in order to solve this problem you can follow a recipe similar to the naive approach sketched earlier. at training time the biggest change is that you can weight each training example by how bad it would be to mess it up. this change is depicted in algorithm where the binary classiciation data has weights w provided for saying how important a given example is. these weights are derived from the cost function at test time instead of predicting scores and then sorting the list you essentially run the quicksort algorith using f as a comparison a course in machine learning algorithm ranktest f x obj if obj contains or elements then else return obj p randomly chosen object in obj left right for all u obj do end if left left u right right u else end if end for left ranktest f x left right ranktest f x right return left right pick pivot elements that seem smaller than p elements that seem larger than p y f if uniform random variable y then what is the probability that u precedes p sort earlier elements sort later elements function. at each step in algorithm a pivot p is chosen. every other object u is compared to p using f if f thinks u is better then it is sorted on the left otherwise it is sorted on the right. there is one major difference between this algorithmand quicksort the comparison function is allowed to be probabilistic. if f outputs probabilities for instance it predicts that u has an probability of being better than p then it puts it on the left with probability and on the right with probability. pseudocode is written in such a way that even if f just predicts the algorithm still works. this algorithm is better than the naive algorithm in at least two ways. first it only makes om m calls to f expectation rather than calls in the naive case. second it achieves a better error bound shown below theorem error bound. suppose the average binary error of f is then the ranking algorithm achieves a test error of at most in the general case and in the bipartite case. collective classification you are writing new software for a digital camera that does face identification. however instead of simply finding a bounding box around faces in an image you must predict where a face is at the pixel level. so your input is an image pixels this is a really low resolution camera! and your output is a set of binary predictions about each pixel. you are given a large collection figure example face finding image and pixel mask beyond binary classification of training examples. an example inputoutput pair is shown in figure your first attempt might be to train a binary classifier to predict whether pixel j is part of a face or not. you might feed in features to this classifier about the rgb values of pixel j as well as pixels in a window arround that. for instance pixels in the region k j l k l you run your classifier and notice that it predicts weird things like what you see in figure you then realize that predicting each pixel independently is a bad idea! if pixel j is part of a face then this significantly increases the chances that pixel j is also part of a face. similarly for other pixels. this is a collective classification problem because you are trying to predict multiple correlated objects at the same time. the most general way to formulate these problems is as graph prediction problems. our input now takes the form of a graph where the vertices are inputoutput pairs and the edges represent the correlations among the putputs. that edges do not need to express correlations among the inputs these can simply be encoded on the nodes themselves. for example in the face identification case each pixel would correspond to an vertex in the graph. for the vertex that corresponds to pixel the input would be whatever set of features we want about that pixel features about neighboring pixels. there would be edges between that vertex and instance vertices and if we are predicting one of k classes at each vertex then we are given a graph whose vertices are labeled by pairs k x we will write gx to denote the set of all such graphs. a graph in this set is denoted as g e with vertices v and edges e. our goal is a function f that takes as input a graph from gx and predicts a label from for each of its vertices. task collective classification given an input space x and number of classes k an unknown distribution d over gx compute a function f e with vertex v in g and yv is the label predicted by f where yv is the label associated v v yv yv gx gk minimizing in collective classification you would like to be able to use the figure bad pixel mask for previous image similar problems come up all the time. cast the following as collective classification problems web page categorization labeling words in a sentence as noun verb adjective etc. finding genes in dna sequences predicting the stock market. formulate the example problems above as graph prediction problems. a course in machine learning labels of neighboring vertices to help predict the label of a given vertex. for instance you might want to add features to the predict of a given vertex based on the labels of each neighbor. at training time this is easy you get to see the true labels of each neighbor. however at test time it is much more difficult you are yourself predicting the labels of each neighbor. this presents a chicken and egg problem. you are trying to predict a collection of labels. but the prediction of each label depends on the prediction of other labels. if you remember from before a general solution to this problem is iteration you can begin with some guesses and then try to improve these guesses over time. this is the idea of stacking for solving collective classification figure you can train classifiers. the first classifier just predicts the value of each pixel independently like in figure this doesn t use any of the graph structure at all. in the second level you can repeat the classification. however you can use the outputs from the first level as initial guesses of labels. in general for the kth level in the stack you can use the inputs values as well as the predictions for all of the k previous levels of the stack. this means training k-many binary classifiers based on different feature sets. the prediction technique for stacking is sketched in algorithm this takes a list of k classifiers corresponding to each level in the stack and an input graph g. the variable ykv stores the prediction of classifier k on vertex v in the graph. you first predict every node in the vertex using the first layer in the stack and no neighboring information. for the rest of the layers you add on features to each node based on the predictions made by lower levels in the stack for neighboring nodes denotes the neighbors of u. the training procedure follows a similar scheme sketched in algorithm it largely follows the same schematic as the prediction algorithm but with training fed in. after the classifier for the k level has been trained it is used to predict labels on every node in the graph. these labels are used by later levels in the stack as features. one thing to be aware of is that multiclasstrain could conceivably overfit its training data. for example it is possible that the first layer might actually achieve error in which case there is no reason to iterate. but at test time it will probably not get error so this is misleading. there are least two ways to address this issue. the first is to use cross-validation during training and to use the predictions obtained during cross-validation as the predictions from stacktest. this is typically very safe but somewhat expensive. the alternative is to simply over-regularize your training algorithm. in particular instead of trying to find hyperparameters that get the alternatively the fact that we re using a graph might scream to you dynamic programming. rest assured that you can do this too skip forward to chapter for lots more detail here! figure a charicature of how stacking works beyond binary classification algorithm stacktraindcc k multiclasstrain dmc yknv k n v gn for k to k do for n to n do for all v gn do our generated multiclass data initialize predictions for all levels y features and label for node v x x ylnu u n l dmc dmc x add on features for neighboring nodes from lower levels in the stack add to multiclass data end for end for fk multiclasstraindbin for n to n do yknv stacktest fk gn end for end for return fk algorithm stacktest fk g ykv k v g for k to k do for all v g do train kth level classifier predict using kth level classifier return all classifiers initialize predictions for all levels x features for node v x x ylu u n l ykv fkx add on features for neighboring nodes from lower levels in the stack predict according to kth level end for end for return ykv v g return predictions for every node from the last layer best development data performance try to find hyperparameters that make your training performance approximately equal to your development performance. this will ensure that your predictions at the kth layer are indicative of how well the algorithm will actually do at test time. todo finish this discussion exercises exercise todo. linear models learning objectives define and plot four surrogate loss functions squared loss logistic loss exponential loss and hinge loss. compare and contrast the optimiza tion of loss and surrogate loss functions. solve the optimization problem for squared loss with a quadratic regularizer in closed form. implement and debug gradient descent and subgradient descent. dependencies the essence of mathematics is not to make simple things complicated but to make complicated things simple. stanley gudder in chapter you learned about the perceptron algorithm for linear classification. this was both a model classifier and algorithm perceptron update rule in one. in this section we will separate these two and consider general ways for optimizing linear models. this will lead us into some aspects of optimization mathematical programming but not very far. at the end of this chapter there are pointers to more literature on optimization for those who are interested. the basic idea of the perceptron is to run a particular algorithm until a linear separator is found. you might ask are there better algorithms for finding such a linear separator? we will follow this idea and formulate a learning problem as an explicit optimization problem find me a linear separator that is not too complicated. we will see that finding an optimal separator is actually computationally prohibitive and so will need to relax the optimality requirement. this will lead us to a convex objective that combines a loss function well are we doing on the training data? and a regularizer complicated is our learned model?. this learning framework is known as both tikhonov regularization and structural risk minimization. the optimization framework for linear models you have already seen the perceptron as a way of finding a weight vector w and bias b that do a good job of separating positive training examples from negative training examples. the perceptron is a model and algorithm in one. here we are interested in separating these issues. we will focus on linear models like the perceptron. but we will think about other more generic ways of finding good parameters of these models. the goal of the perceptron was to find a separating hyperplane for some training data set. for simplicity you can ignore the issue of overfitting just for now!. not all data sets are linearly sepa linear models you should remember the yw trick from the perceptron discussion. if not re-convince yourself that this is doing the right thing. x rable. in the case that your training data isn t linearly separable you might want to find the hyperplane that makes the fewest errors on the training data. we can write this down as a formal mathematics optimization problem as follows min wb n xn b in this expression you are optimizing over two variables w and b. the objective function is the thing you are trying to minimize. in this case the objective function is simply the error rate loss of the linear classifier parameterized by w b. in this expression is the indicator function it is one when is true and zero otherwise. we know that the perceptron algorithm is guaranteed to find parameters for this model if the data is linearly separable. in other words if the optimum of eq is zero then the perceptron will efficiently find parameters for this model. the notion of efficiency depends on the margin of the data for the perceptron. you might ask what happens if the data is not linearly separable? is there an efficient algorithm for finding an optimal setting of the parameters? unfortunately the answer is no. there is no polynomial time algorithm for solving eq unless pnp. in other words this problem is np-hard. sadly the proof of this is quite complicated and beyond the scope of this book but it relies on a reduction from a variant of satisfiability. the key idea is to turn a satisfiability problem into an optimization problem where a clause is satisfied exactly when the hyperplane correctly separates the data. you might then come back and say okay well i don t really need an exact solution. i m willing to have a solution that makes one or two more errors than it has to. unfortunately the situation is really bad. zeroone loss is np-hard to even appproximately minimize. in other words there is no efficient algorithm for even finding a solution that s a small constant worse than optimal. best known constant at this time is however before getting too disillusioned about this whole enterprise there s an entire chapter about this framework so it must be going somewhere! you should remember that optimizing eq perhaps isn t even what you want to do! in particular all it says is that you will get minimal training error. it says nothing about what your test error will be like. in order to try to find a solution that will generalize well to test data you need to ensure that you do not overfit the data. to do this you can introduce a regularizer over the parameters of the model. for now we will be vague about what this regularizer looks like and simply call it an arbitrary function rw b. a course in machine learning this leads to the following regularized objective min wb n xn b rw b in eq we are now trying to optimize a trade-off between a solution that gives low training error first term and a solution that is simple second term. you can think of the maximum depth hyperparameter of a decision tree as a form of regularization for trees. here r is a form of regularization for hyperplanes. in this formulation becomes a hyperparameter for the optimization. the key remaining questions given this formalism are how can we adjust the optimization problem so that there are efficient algorithms for solving it? what are good regularizers rw b for hyperplanes? assuming we can adjust the optimization problem appropriately what algorithms exist for efficiently solving this regularized optimization problem? we will address these three questions in the next sections. convex surrogate loss functions you might ask why is optimizing zeroone loss so hard? intuitively one reason is that small changes to w b can have a large impact on the value of the objective function. for instance if there is a positive training example with w x then adjusting b upwards by will decrease your error rate by but adjusting it upwards by will have no effect. this makes it really difficult to figure out good ways to adjust the parameters. to see this more clearly it is useful to look at plots that relate margin to loss. such a plot for zeroone loss is shown in figure in this plot the horizontal axis measure the margin of a data point and the vertical axis measures the loss associated with that margin. for zeroone loss the story is simple. if you get a positive margin yw x b then you get a loss of zero. otherwise you get a loss of one. by thinking about this plot you can see how changes to the parameters that change the margin just a little bit can have an enormous effect on the overall loss. you might decide that a reasonable way to address this problem is to replace the non-smooth zeroone loss with a smooth approximation. with a bit of effort you could probably concoct an s function like that shown in figure the benefit of using such an s-function is that it is smooth and potentially easier to optimize. the difficulty is that it is not convex. assuming r does the right thing what values of will lead to overfitting? what values will lead to underfitting? figure plot of zeroone versus margin figure plot of zeroone versus margin and an s version of it linear models figure surrogate loss fns if you remember from calculus a convex function is one that looks like a happy face the other hand a concave function is one that looks like a sad face an easy mnemonic is that you can hide under a concave function. there are two equivalent definitions of a concave function. the first is that it s second derivative is always non-negative. the second more geometric defition is that any chord of the function lies above it. this is shown in figure there you can see a convex function and a non-convex function both with two chords drawn in. in the case of the convex function the chords lie above the function. in the case of the non-convex function there are parts of the chord that lie below the function. convex functions are nice because they are easy to minimize. intuitively if you drop a ball anywhere in a convex function it will eventually get to the minimum. this is not true for non-convex functions. for example if you drop a ball on the very left end of the s-function from figure it will not go anywhere. this leads to the idea of convex surrogate loss functions. since zeroone loss is hard to optimize you want to optimize something else instead. since convex functions are easy to optimize we want to approximate zeroone loss with a convex function. this approximating function will be called a surrogate loss. the surrogate losses we construct will always be upper bounds on the true loss function this guarantees that if you minimize the surrogate loss you are also pushing down the real loss. there are four common surrogate loss function each with their own properties hinge loss logistic loss exponential loss and squared loss. these are shown in figure and defined below. these are defined in terms of the true label y is just and the predicted value y w x b. zeroone hinge logistic exponential squared y y y y y y y exp y y y log log exp y y log term out front is there sim in the definition of logistic loss the ply to ensure that this ensures like all the other surrogate loss functions that logistic loss upper bounds the zeroone loss. practice people typically omit this constant since it does not affect the optimization. there are two big differences in these loss functions. the first difference is how upset they get by erroneous predictions. in the a course in machine learning case of hinge loss and logistic loss the growth of the function as y goes negative is linear. for squared loss and exponential loss it is super-linear. this means that exponential loss would rather get a few examples a little wrong than one example really wrong. the other difference is how they deal with very confident correct predictions. once y y hinge loss does not care any more but logistic and exponential still think you can do better. on the other hand squared loss thinks it s just as bad to predict on a positive example as it is to predict on a positive example. weight regularization in our learning objective eq we had a term correspond to the zeroone loss on the training data plus a regularizer whose goal was to ensure that the learned function didn t get too crazy. more formally to ensure that the function did not overfit. if you replace to zeroone loss with a surrogate loss you obtain the following objective min wb n w xn b rw b the question is what should rw b look like? from the discussion of surrogate loss function we would like to ensure that r is convex. otherwise we will be back to the point where optimization becomes difficult. beyond that a common desire is that the components of the weight vector the wds should be small to zero. this is a form of inductive bias. why are small values of wd good? or more precisely why do small values of wd correspond to simple functions? suppose that we have an example x with label we might believe that other examples that are nearby x should also have label for example if i obtain by taking x and changing the first component by some small value and leaving the rest the same you might think that the classification would be the same. if you do this the difference between y and will be exactly so if is reasonably small this is unlikely to have much of an effect on the classification decision. on the other hand if is large this could have a large effect. another way of saying the same thing is to look at the derivative of the predictions as a function of the derivative of w x with respect to is d wdxd b w x interpreting the derivative as the rate of change we can see that the rate of change of the prediction function is proportional to the individual weights. so if you want the function to change slowly you want to ensure that the weights stay small. one way to accomplish this is to simply use the norm of the d weight vector. namely rnormw b is convex and smooth which makes it easy to minimize. in practice it s often easier to use the squared norm namely rsqrw b d remains convex. an alternative to using the sum of squared weights is to use the sum of absolute weights rabsw b d both of these norms are convex. d because it removes the ugly square root term and d. this function in addition to small weights being good you could argue that zero weights are better. if a weight wd goes to zero then this means that feature d is not used at all in the classification decision. if there are a large number of irrelevant features you might want as many weights to go to zero as possible. this suggests an alternative regularizer rcntw b d this line of thinking leads to the general concept of p-norms. these are called ell p norms but this notation clashes with the use of for loss. this is a family of norms that all have the same general flavor. we write to denote the p-norm of w. p d you can check that the exactly corresponds to the usual euclidean norm and that the corresponds to the absolute regularizer described above. when p-norms are used to regularize weight vectors the interest ing aspect is how they trade-off multiple features. to see the behavior of p-norms in two dimensions we can plot their contour levelset. figure shows the contours for the same p norms in two dimensions. each line denotes the two-dimensional vectors to which this norm assignes a total value of by changing the value of p you can interpolate between a square so-called max norm down to a circle diamond and pointy-star-shaped-thing norm. in general smaller values of p prefer sparser vectors. you can see this by noticing that the contours of small p-norms stretch out along the axes. it is for this reason that small p-norms tend to yield weight vectors with many zero entries sparse weight vectors. unfortunately for p the norm becomes non-convex. as you might guess this means that the is a popular choice for sparsity-seeking applications. linear models why do we not regularize the bias term b? why might you not want to use rcnt as a regularizer? you can actually identify the rcnt regularizer with a p-norm as well. which value of p gives it to you? you may have to take a limit. figure level sets of the same p-norms the max norm corresponds to limp why is this called the max norm? a course in machine learning math review gradients be sure to do enough to do the closed for squared error algorithm gradientdescentf k for k k do gk zk end for return zk initialize variable we are optimizing compute gradient at current location take a step down the gradient figure optimization with gradient descent envision the following problem. you re taking up a new hobby blindfolded mountain climbing. someone blindfolds you and drops you on the side of a mountain. your goal is to get to the peak of the mountain as quickly as possible. all you can do is feel the mountain where you are standing and take steps. how would you get to the top of the mountain? perhaps you would feel to find out what direction feels the most upward and take a step in that direction. if you do this repeatedly you might hope to get the the top of the mountain. if your friend promises always to drop you on purely concave mountains you will eventually get to the peak! the idea of gradient-based methods of optimization is exactly the same. suppose you are trying to find the maximum of a function f the optimizer maintains a current estimate of the parameter of interest x. at each step it measures the gradient of the function it is trying optimize. this measurement occurs at the current location x. call the gradient g. it then takes a step in the direction of the gradient where the size of the step is controlled by a parameter the complete step is x x g. this is the basic idea of gradient ascent. the opposite of gradient ascent is gradient descent. all of our learning problems will be framed as minimization problems to reach the bottom of a ditch rather than the top of a hill. therefore descent is the primary approach you will use. one of the major conditions for gradient ascent being able to find the true global minimum of its objective function is convexity. without convexity all is lost. the gradient descent algorithm is sketched in algorithm the function takes as arguments the function f to be minimized the number of iterations k to run and a sequence of learning rates linear models k. is to address the case that you might want to start your mountain climbing taking large steps but only take small steps when you are close to the peak. the only real work you need to do to apply a gradient descent method is be able to compute derivatives. for concreteness suppose that you choose exponential loss as a loss function and the as a regularizer. then the regularized objective function is ynw xn lw b n the only strange thing in this objective is that we have replaced with the reason for this change is just to make the gradients cleaner. we can first compute derivatives with respect to b l b n b ynw xn ynw xn yn ynw xn ynw xn b b b n n n b ynw xn before proceeding it is worth thinking about what this says. from a practical perspective the optimization will operate by updating b b l b consider positive examples examples with yn we would hope for these examples that the current prediction w xn b is as large as possible. as this value tends toward the term in the exp goes to zero. thus such points will not contribute to the step. however if the current prediction is small then the exp term will be positive and non-zero. this means that the bias term b will be increased which is exactly what you would want. moreover once all points are very well classified the derivative goes to zero. now that we have done the easy case let s do the gradient with respect to w. wl w n ynw xn w w ynw xn b ynw xn w ynxn ynw xn w n n now you can repeat the previous exercise. the update is of the form w w wl. for well classified points that are tend toward yn the gradient is near zero. for poorly classified points this considered the case of positive examples. what happens with negative examples? a course in machine learning the gradient points in the direction ynxn so the update is of the form w w cynxn where c is some constant. this is just like the perceptron update! note that c is large for very poorly classified points and small for relatively well classified points. by looking at the part of the gradient related to the regularizer the update says w w w this has the effect of shrinking the weights toward zero. this is exactly what we expect the regulaizer to be doing! the success of gradient descent hinges on appropriate choices for the step size. figure shows what can happen with gradient descent with poorly chosen step sizes. if the step size is too big you can accidentally step over the optimum and end up oscillating. if the step size is too small it will take way too long to get to the optimum. for a well-chosen step size you can show that gradient descent will approach the optimal value at a fast rate. the notion of convergence here is that the objective value converges to the true minimum. figure good and bad step sizes theorem descent convergence. under suitable for an appropriately chosen constant step size the convergence rate of gradient descent is more specifically letting z be the global minimum of f we have f f z k specifically the function to be optimized needs to be strongly convex. this is true for all our problems provided for the rate could be as bad as k. a naive reading of this theorem seems to say that you should choose huge values of it should be obvious that this cannot be right. what is missing? the proof of this theorem is a bit complicated because it makes heavy use of some linear algebra. the key is to set the learning rate to where l is the maximum curvature of the function that is being optimized. the curvature is simply the size of the second derivative. functions with high curvature have gradients that change quickly which means that you need to take small steps to avoid overstepping the optimum. this convergence result suggests a simple approach to decid ing when to stop optimizing wait until the objective function stops changing by much. an alternative is to wait until the parameters stop changing by much. a final example is to do what you did for perceptron early stopping. every iteration you can check the performance of the current model on some held-out data and stop optimizing when performance plateaus. from gradients to subgradients as a good exercise you should try deriving gradient descent update rules for the different loss functions and different regularizers you ve learned about. however if you do this you might notice that hinge loss and the regularizer are not differentiable everywhere! in particular the is not differentiable around wd and the hinge loss is not differentiable around y y linear models the solution to this is to use subgradient optimization. one way to think about subgradients is just to not think about it you essentially need to just ignore the fact that you forgot that your function wasn t differentiable and just try to apply gradient descent anyway. z. this function is differentiable for z and differentiable for z but not differentiable at z you can derive this using differentiation by parts to be more concrete consider the hinge function f z f z z z z z if z if z if z if z if z if z thus the derivative is zero for z and for z matching intuition from the figure. at the non-differentiable point z we can use a subderivative a generalization of derivatives to nondifferentiable functions. intuitively you can think of the derivative of f at z as the tangent line. namely it is the line that touches f at z that is always below f convex functions. the subderivative denoted f is the set of all such lines. at differentiable positions this set consists just of the actual derivative. at non-differentiable positions this contains all slopes that define lines that always lie under the function and make contact at the operating point. this is shown pictorally in figure where example subderivatives are shown for the hinge loss function. in the particular case of hinge loss any value between and is a valid subderivative at z in fact the subderivative is always a closed set of the form b where a and b can be derived by looking at limits from the left and right. figure hinge loss with sub this gives you a way of computing derivative-like things for nondifferentiable functions. take hinge loss as an example. for a given example n the subgradient of hinge loss can be computed as w ynw xn b otherwise w ynw xn b wynw xn b otherwise if ynw xn b ynxn otherwise if ynw xn b if ynw xn b a course in machine learning algorithm hingeregularizedgdd maxiter w for iter maxiter do g for all d do b g if yw x b then initialize weights and bias initialize gradient of weights and bias g g y x g g y end if end for g g w w w g b b g end for return w b update weight gradient update bias derivative add in regularization term update weights update bias math review matrix multiplication and inversion figure if you plug this subgradient form into algorithm you obtain algorithm this is the subgradient descent for regularized hinge loss a regularizer. closed-form optimization for squared loss although gradient descent is a good generic optimization algorithm there are cases when you can do better. an example is the case of a regularizer and squared error loss function. for this you can actually obtain a closed form solution for the optimal weights. however to obtain this you need to rewrite the optimization problem in terms of matrix operations. for simplicity we will only consider the unbiased version but the extension is exercise this is precisely the linear regression setting. you can think of the training data as a large matrix x of size n d where xnd is the value of the dth feature on the nth example. you can think of the labels as a column tall vector y of dimension n. finally you can think of the weights as a column vector w of size d. thus the matrix-vector product a xw has dimension n. in particular an d xndwd this means in particular that a is actually the predictions of the model. instead of calling this a we will call it y. the squared error linear models verify that the squared error can actually be written as this vector norm. says that we should minimize in vector form as a minimization of this can be expanded visually as n yn which can be written xnd x y d d d xndwd y wd w yn y so compactly our optimization problem can be written as min w lw if you recall from calculus you can minimize a function by setting its derivative to zero. we start with the weights w and take gradients we can equate this to zero and solve yielding wlw y w w w i i id w w id w thus the optimal solution of the weights can be computed by a few matrix multiplications and a matrix inversion. as a sanity check you can make sure that the dimensions match. the matrix has dimension d d and therefore so does the inverse term. the inverse is d d and is d n so that product is d n. multiplying through by the n vector y yields a d vector which is precisely what we want for the weights. note that this gives an exact solution modulo numerical innacu racies with computing matrix inverses. in contrast gradient descent will give you progressively better solutions and will eventually converge to the optimum at a rate of this means that if you want an answer that s within an accuracy of you will need something on the order of one thousand steps. the question is whether getting this exact solution is always more efficient. to run gradient descent for one step will take ond time with a relatively small constant. you will have to run k iterations for those who are keen on linear algebra you might be worried that the matrix you must invert might not be invertible. is this actually a problem? a course in machine learning yielding an overall runtime of oknd. on the other hand the closed form solution requires constructing which takes time. the inversion take time using standard matrix inversion routines. the final multiplications take ond time. thus the overall runtime is on the order in most standard cases this is becoming less true over time n d so this is dominated by thus the overall question is whether you will need to run more than d-many iterations of gradient descent. if so then the matrix inversion will be faster. otherwise gradient descent will be faster. for low- and medium-dimensional problems d it is probably faster to do the closed form solution via matrix inversion. for high dimensional problems it is probably faster to do gradient descent. for things in the middle it s hard to say for sure. support vector machines at the beginning of this chapter you may have looked at the convex surrogate loss functions and asked yourself where did these come from?! they are all derived from different underlying principles which essentially correspond to different inductive biases. let s start by thinking back to the original goal of linear classifiers to find a hyperplane that separates the positive training examples from the negative ones. figure shows some data and three potential hyperplanes red green and blue. which one do you like best? most likely you chose the green hyperplane. and most likely you chose it because it was furthest away from the closest training points. in other words it had a large margin. the desire for hyperplanes with large margins is a perfect example of an inductive bias. the data does not tell us which of the three hyperplanes is best we have to choose one using some other source of information. following this line of thinking leads us to the support vector ma chine this is simply a way of setting up an optimization problem that attempts to find a separating hyperplane with as large a margin as possible. it is written as a constrained optimization problem figure picture of data points with three hyperplanes rgb with g the best b min wb subj. to yn xn b n in this optimization you are trying to find parameters that maximize the margin denoted minimize the reciprocal of the margin linear models figure hyperplane with margins on sides figure one bad point with slack subject to the constraint that all training examples are correctly classified. the odd thing about this optimization problem is that we re quire the classification of each point to be greater than one rather than simply greater than zero. however the problem doesn t fundamentally change if you replace the with any other positive constant exercise as shown in figure the constant one can be interpreted visually as ensuring that there is a non-trivial margin between the positive points and negative points. the difficulty with the optimization problem in eq is what happens with data that is not linearly separable. in that case there is no set of parameters w b that can simultaneously satisfy all the constraints. in optimization terms you would say that the feasible region is empty. feasible region is simply the set of all parameters that satify the constraints. for this reason this is refered to as the hard-margin svm because enforcing the margin is a hard constraint. the question is how to modify this optimization problem so that it can handle inseparable data. the key idea is the use of slack parameters. the intuition behind slack parameters is the following. suppose we find a set of parameters w b that do a really good job on data points. the points are perfectly classifed and you achieve a large margin. but there s one pesky data point left that cannot be put on the proper side of the margin perhaps it is noisy. figure you want to be able to pretend that you can move that point across the hyperplane on to the proper side. you will have to pay a little bit to do so but as long as you aren t moving a lot of points around it should be a good idea to do this. in this picture the amount that you move the point is denoted by introducing one slack parameter for each training example and penalizing yourself for having to use slack you can create an objective function like the following soft-margin svm c n n b subj. to yn xn b n large margin small slack min wb n n n the goal of this objective function is to ensure that all points are correctly classified first constraint. but if a point n cannot be correctly classified then you can set the slack n to something greater than zero to move it in the correct direction. however for all nonzero slacks you have to pay in the objective function proportional to the amount of slack. the hyperparameter c controls overfitting what values of c will lead to overfitting? what values will lead to underfitting? suppose i give you a data set. without even looking at the data construct for me a feasible solution to the soft-margin svm. what is the value of the objective for this solution? a course in machine learning versus underfitting. the second constraint simply says that you must not have negative slack. one major advantage of the soft-margin svm over the original hard-margin svm is that the feasible region is never empty. that is there is always going to be some solution regardless of whether your training data is linearly separable or not. it s one thing to write down an optimization problem. it s another thing to try to solve it. there are a very large number of ways to optimize svms essentially because they are such a popular learning model. here we will talk just about one very simple way. more complex methods will be discussed later in this book once you have a bit more background. by this observation there is some positive example that that lies to make progress you need to be able to measure the size of the margin. suppose someone gives you parameters w b that optimize the hard-margin svm. we wish to measure the size of the margin. the first observation is that the hyperplane will lie exactly halfway between the nearest positive point and nearest negative point. if not the margin could be made bigger by simply sliding it one way or the other by adjusting the bias b. exactly unit from the hyperplane. call it x so that w x b similarly there is some negative example x that lies exactly on the other side of the margin for which w x b these two points x and x give us a way to measure the size of the margin. as shown in figure we can measure the size of the margin by looking at the difference between the lengths of projections of x and x onto the hyperplane. since projection requires a normalized vector we can measure the distances as d d w x b w x b d w x w x b w x b w x we can then compute the margin by algebra figure copy of figure from of svm tutorial linear models this is a remarkable conclusion the size of the margin is inversely proportional to the norm of the weight vector. thus maximizing the margin is equivalent to minimizing this serves as an additional justification of the regularizer having small weights means having large margins! however our goal wasn t to justify the regularizer it was to understand hinge loss. so let us go back to the soft-margin svm and plug in our new knowledge about margins min wb c n large margin subj. to yn xn b n small slack n n n n now let s play a thought experiment. suppose someone handed you a solution to this optimization problem that consisted of weights and a bias but they forgot to give you the slacks. could you recover the slacks from the information you have? in fact the answer is yes! for simplicity let s consider positive examples. suppose that you look at some positive example xn. you need to figure out what the slack n would have been. there are two cases. either w xn b is at least or it is not. if it s large enough then you want to set n why? it cannot be less than zero by the second constraint. moreover if you set it greater than zero you will pay unnecessarily in the objective. so in this case n next suppose that w xn b so it is not big enough. in order to satisfy the first constraint you ll need to set n but because of the objective you ll not want to set it any larger than necessary so you ll set n exactly. following this argument through for both positive and negative points if someone gives you solutions for w b you can automatically compute the optimal variables as n ynw xn b otherwise if ynw xn b in other words the optimal value for a slack variable is exactly the hinge loss on the corresponding example! thus we can write the svm objective as an unconstrained optimization problem min wb large margin c n w xn b small slack multiplying this objective through by we obtain exactly the regularized objective from eq with hinge loss as the loss function and the as the regularizer! a course in machine learning todo justify in term of one dimensional projections! exercises exercise todo. probabilistic modeling learning objectives define the generative story for a naive bayes classifier. derive relative frequency as the solution to a constrained optimization problem. compare and contrast generative conditional and discriminative learning. explain when generative models are likely to fail. derive logistic loss with an regularizer from a probabilistic perspective. dependencies many of the models and algorithms you have learned about thus far are relatively disconnected. there is an alternative view of machine learning that unites and generalizes much of what you have already learned. this is the probabilistic modeling framework in which you will explicitly think of learning as a problem of statistical inference. in this chapter you will learn about two flavors of probabilistic models generative and conditional. you will see that many of the approaches supervised and unsupervised we have seen already can be cast as probabilistic models. through this new view you will be able to develop learning algorithms that have inductive biases closer to what you as a designer believe. moreover the two chapters that follow will make heavy use of the probabilistic modeling approach to open doors to other learning problems. classification by density estimation our underlying assumption for the majority of this book is that learning problems are characterized by some unknown probability distribution d over inputoutput pairs y x y. suppose that someone told you what d was. in particular they gave you a python function computed that took two inputs x and y and returned the probability of that x y pair under d. if you had access to such a function classification becomes simple. we can define the bayes optimal classifier as the classifier that for any test input x simply returns the y that maximizes computed x y or more formally f x arg max y y d x y this classifier is optimal in one specific sense of all possible classifiers it achieves the smallest zeroone error. theorem optimal classifier. the bayes optimal classifier f achieves minimal zeroone error of any deterministic classifier. figure a course in machine learning math review rules of probability chain rule marginalization and bayes rule this theorem assumes that you are comparing against deterministic classifiers. you can actually prove a stronger result that f is optimal for randomized classifiers as well but the proof is a bit messier. however the intuition is the same for a given x f chooses the label with highest probability thus minimizing the probability that it makes an error. proof of theorem consider some other classifier g that claims to be better than f then there must be some x on which gx f fix such an x. now the probability that f makes an error on this particular x is dx f and the probability that g makes an error on this x is dx gx. but f was chosen in such a way to maximize dx f so this must be greater than dx gx. thus the probability that f errs on this particular x is smaller than the probability that g errs on it. this applies to any x for which f gx and therefore f achieves smaller zeroone error than any g. the bayes error rate bayes optimal error rate is the error rate of the bayes optimal classifier. it is the best error rate you can ever hope to achieve on this classification problem zeroone loss. the take-home message is that if someone gave you access to the data distribution forming an optimal classifier would be trivial. unfortunately no one gave you this distribution but this analysis suggests that good way to build a classifier is to try to estimate d. in other words you try to learn a distribution d which you hope to very similar to d and then use this distribution for classification. just as in the preceding chapters you can try to form your estimate of d based on a finite training set. the most direct way that you can attempt to construct such a probability distribution is to select a family of parametric distributions. for instance a gaussian normal distribution is parametric it s parameters are its mean and covariance. the job of learning is then to infer which parameters are best as far as the observed training data is concerned as well as whatever inductive bias you bring. a key assumption that you will need to make is that the training data you have access to is drawn independently from d. in particular as you draw examples d then d and so on the nth draw yn is drawn from d and does not otherwise depend probabilistic modeling describe a case in which at least one of the assumptions we are making about the coin flip is false. on the previous n samples. this assumption is usually false but is also usually sufficiently close to being true to be useful. together with the assumption that all the training data is drawn from the same distribution d leads to the i.i.d. assumption or independently and identically distributed assumption. this is a key assumption in almost all of machine learning. statistical estimation suppose you need to model a coin that is possibly biased can think of this as modeling the label in a binary classification problem and that you observe data hhth h means a flip came up heads and t means it came up tails. you can assume that all the flips came from the same coin and that each flip was independent the data was i.i.d.. further you may choose to believe that the coin has a fixed probability of coming up heads hence of coming up tails. thus the parameter of your model is simply the scalar the most basic computation you might perform is maximum like lihood estimation namely select the paramter the maximizes the probability of the data under that parameter. in order to do so you need to compute the probability of the data p p p definition of d data is independent thus if you want the parameter that maximizes the probability of the data you can take the derivative of with respect to set it equal to zero and solve for thus the maximum likelihood is which is probably what you would have selected by intuition. you can solve this problem more generally as follows. if you have h-many heads and t-many tails the probability of your data sequence is you can try to take the derivative of this with respect to and follow the same recipe but all of the products make things difficult. a more how do you know that the solution of hh t is actually a maximum? a course in machine learning friendly solution is to work with the log likelihood or log probability instead. the log likelihood of this data sequence is h log t differentiating with respect to you get h to solve you obtain h so t thus h h t and so h t finally yeilding that hh t or simply the fraction of observed data that came up heads. in this case the maximum likelihood estimate is nothing but the relative frequency of observing heads! now suppose that instead of flipping a coin you re rolling a k sided die instance to pick the label for a multiclass classification problem. you might model this by saying that there are parameters k specifying respectively the probabilities that any given side comes up on a role. since these are themselves probabilities each k should be at least zero and the sum of the ks should be one. given a data set that consists of rolls of rolls of and so on the probability of this data is k k xk log k. if you pick some particular parameter say the derivative of this with respect to is which you want to equate to zero. this leads to. xk k yielding a log probability of this is obviously wrong. from the mathematical formulation xk k it s correct in fact setting all of the ks to does maximize k for any xks. the problem is that you need to constrain the s to sum to one. in particular you have a constraint that k k that you forgot to enforce. a convenient way to enforce such constraints is through the technique of lagrange multipliers. to make this problem consistent with standard minimization problems it is convenient to minimize negative log probabilities instead of maximizing log probabilities. thus the constrainted optimization problem is k xk log k k min subj. to k the lagrange multiplier approach involves adding a new variable to the problem the lagrange variable corresponding to the constraint and to use that to move the constraint into the objective. the result in this case is max min xk log k k k k turning a constrained optimization problem into it s corresponding lagrangian is straightforward. the mystical aspect is why it works. in this case the idea is as follows. think of as an adversary probabilistic modeling is trying to maximize this function re trying to minimize it. if you pick some parameters that actually satisfy the constraint then the green term in eq goes to zero and therefore does not matter the adversary cannot do anything. on the other hand if the constraint is even slightly unsatisfied then can tend toward or to blow up the objective. so in order to have a non-infinite objective value the optimizer must find values of that satisfy the constraint. if we solve the inner optimization of eq by differentiating with respect to we get yielding in general the solution is k xk remembering that the goal of is to enforce the sums-to-one constraint we can set k xk and verify that this is a solution. thus our optimal k xk k xk which again completely corresponds to intuition. naive bayes models now consider the binary classification problem. you are looking for a parameterized probability distribution that can describe the training data you have. to be concrete your task might be to predict whether a movie review is positive or negative based on what words appear in that review. thus the probability for a single data point can be written as p x p xd the challenge in working with a probability distribution like eq is that it s a distribution over a lot of variables. you can try to simplify it by applying the chain rule of probabilities p xd y p yp y y p y xd p y xd p d at this point this equality is exact for any probability distribution. however it might be difficult to craft a probability distribution for the feature given the previous even if you could it might be difficult to accurately estimate it. at this point you can make assumptions. a classic assumption called the naive bayes assumption is that the features are independent conditioned on the label. in the movie review example this is saying that once you know that it s a positive review the probability that the word excellent appears is independent of whether amazing also appeared. that this does not imply that these words are independent when you a course in machine learning don t know the label they most certainly are not. formally this assumption states that assumption d under this assumption you can simplify eq to pxd y pxd y p x p d p y naive bayes assumption at this point you can start parameterizing p. suppose for now that your labels are binary and your features are also binary. in this case you could model the label as a biased coin with probability of heads positive review given by then for each label you can imagine having one coin for each feature. so if there are d-many features you ll have total coins one for the label it and one for each labelfeature combination these and as in the movie review example we might expect percent of movie reviews are positive and also that might give high probability to words like excellent and amazing and good and might give high probability to words like terrible and boring and hate you can rewrite the probability of a single example as follows eventually leading to the log probability of the entire data set p x p p y d naive bayes assumption model assumptions d solving for is identical to solving for the biased coin case from before it is just the relative frequency of positive labels in your data doesn t depend on x at all. for the other parameters you can repeat the same exercise as before for each of the coins independently. this yields n n nyn xnd nyn xnd nyn nyn in the case that the features are not binary you need to choose a different model for pxd y. the model we chose here is the bernouilli distribution which is effectively a distribution over independent probabilistic modeling math review common probability distributions remove people about discrete bernoulli binomial multinomial and gaussian distributions figure coin flips. for other types of data other distributions become more appropriate. the die example from before corresponds to a discrete distribution. if the data is continuous you might choose to use a gaussian distribution normal distribution. the choice of distribution is a form of inductive bias by which you can inject your knowledge of the problem into the learning algorithm. prediction consider the predictions made by the naive bayes model with bernoulli features in eq you can better understand this model by considering its decision boundary. in the case of probabilistic models the decision boundary is the set of inputs for which the likelihood of y is precisely or in other words the set of inputs x for which py xpy x in order to do this the first thing to notice is that py x py xpx. in the ratio the px terms cancel leaving py xpy x. instead of computing this ratio it is easier to compute the log-likelihood ratio llr log py x log py x computed below llr log d log d log log log d d d xd log log d log log log d d xd log xd log x w b model assumptions take logs and rearrange simplify log terms group x-terms a course in machine learning wd log b d log log the result of the algebra is that the naive bayes model has precisely the form of a linear model! thus like perceptron and many of the other models you ve previous studied the decision boundary is linear. todo mbr generative stories a useful way to develop probabilistic models is to tell a generative story. this is a fictional story that explains how you believe your training data came into existence. to make things interesting consider a multiclass classification problem with continuous features modeled by independent gaussians. since the label can take values k you can use a discrete distribution roll to model it opposed to the bernoilli distribution from before for each example n n choose a label yn disc for each feature d d i. choose feature value xnd nor ynd ynd this generative story can be directly translated into a likelihood function by replacing the for each s with products n pd for each example exp ynd choose label d ynd choose feature value for each feature you can take logs to arrive at the log-likelihood log pd n log yn d log ynd ynd const to optimize for you need to add a sums to one constraint as before. this leads to the previous solution where the ks are proportional to the number of examples with label k. in the case of the s probabilistic modeling you can take a derivative with respect to say ki and obtain log pd ki ki n d ynd ki nynk kd nynk kd ki setting this equal to zero and solving yields ki nynk xni nynk ignore irrelevant terms ignore irrelevant terms take derivative namely the sample mean of the ith feature of the data points that fall in class k. a similar analysis for ki yields log pd ki ki yynk log ki ki yynk ki ki yynk k ki ignore irrelevant terms take derivative simplify you can now set this equal to zero and solve yielding ki nynkxni nynk which is just the sample variance of feature i for class k. conditional models in the foregoing examples the task was formulated as attempting to model the joint distribution of y pairs. this may seem wasteful at prediction time all you care about is py x so why not model it directly? starting with the case of regression is actually somewhat simpler than starting with classification in this case. suppose you believe what would the estimate be if you decided that for a given class k all features had equal variance? what if you assumed feature i had equal variance for each class? under what circumstances might it be a good idea to make such assumptions? a course in machine learning that the relationship between the real value y and the vector x should be linear. that is you expect that y w x b should hold for some parameters b. of course the data that you get does not exactly obey this that s fine you can think of deviations from y w x b as noise. to form a probabilistic model you must assume some distribution over noise a convenient choice is zero-mean gaussian noise. this leads to the following generative story for each example n n compute tn w xn b choose noise en return yn tn en in this story the variable tn stands for target. it is the noiseless variable that you do not get to observe. similarly en is the error on example n. the value that you actually get to observe is yn tn en. see figure a basic property of the gaussian distribution is additivity. namely that if a nor and b a c then b nor c given this from the generative story above you can derive a shorter generative story for each example n n choose yn norw xn b figure pictorial view of targets versus labels reading off the log likelihood of a dataset from this generative story you obtain log pd n log xn b n xn b const model assumptions remove constants this is precisely the linear regression model you encountered in section to minimizing the negative log probability you need only solve for the regression coefficients w b as before. in the case of binary classification using a gaussian noise model does not make sense. switching to a bernoulli model which describes binary outcomes makes more sense. the only remaining difficulty is that the parameter of a bernoulli is a value between zero and one probability of heads so your model must produce such values. a classic approach is to produce a real-valued target as before and then transform this target into a value between zero and one so that maps to and maps to a function that does this is the logistic defined below and plotted in figure logistic function exp z exp z exp z the logistic function has several nice properties that you can verify for yourself z and z z using the logistic function you can write down a generative story probabilistic modeling also called the sigmoid function because of it s s figure sketch of logistic function for binary classification for each example n n compute tn xn b compute zn bertn return yn make it the log-likelihood for this model is log pd n log xn b log w xn b log xn b n n n log exp yn xn b w xn b model and properties of join terms definition of definition of as you can see the log-likelihood is precisely the negative of scaled version of the logistic loss from chapter this model is the logistic regression model and this is where logisitic loss originally derived from. todo conditional versus joint regularization via priors in the foregoing discussion parameters of the model were selected according to the maximum likelihood criteria find the parameters that maximize p the trouble with this approach is easy to see even in a simple coin flipping example. if you flip a coin twice and it comes up heads both times the maximum likelihood estimate a course in machine learning for the bias of the coin is it will always come up heads. this is true even if you had only flipped it once! if course if you had flipped it one million times and it had come up heads every time then you might find this to be a reasonable solution. this is clearly undesirable behavior especially since data is expensive in a machine learning setting. one solution are others! is to seek parameters that balance a tradeoff between the likelihood of the data and some prior belief you have about what values of those parameters are likely. taking the case of the logistic regression you might a priori believe that small values of w are more likely than large values and choose to represent this as a gaussian prior on each component of w. the maximum a posteriori principle is a method for incoporat ing both data and prior beliefs to obtain a more balanced parameter estimate. in abstract terms consider a probabilistic model over data d that is parameterized by parameters if you think of the parameters as just another random variable then you can write this model as pd and maximum likelihood amounts to choosing to maximize pd however you might instead with to maximize the probability of the parameters given the data. namely maximize p d. this term is known as the posterior distribution on and can be computed by bayes rule p d posterior evidence likelihood prior p pd pd d p where pd this reads the posterior is equal to the prior times the likelihood divided by the the evidence is a scary-looking term has an integral! but note that from the perspective of seeking parameters than maximize the posterior the evidence is just a constant does not depend on and therefore can be ignored. returning to the logistic regression example with gaussian priors on the weights the log posterior looks like the evidence is sometimes called the marginal likelihood. log p d n w xn b d d const n w xn b model definition and therefore reduces to a regularized logistic function with a squared regularizer on the weights. regularizer probabilistic modeling can be obtained by using a laplace prior on w rather than a gaussian prior on w. exercises exercise todo. neural networks the first learning models you learned about trees and nearest neighbor models created complex non-linear decision boundaries. we moved from there to the perceptron perhaps the most classic linear model. at this point we will move back to nonlinear learning models but using all that we have learned about linear learning thus far. this chapter presents an extension of perceptron learning to nonlinear decision boundaries taking the biological inspiration of neurons even further. in the perceptron we thought of the input data point an image as being directly connected to an output label. this is often called a single-layer network because there is one layer of weights. now instead of directly connecting the inputs to the outputs we will insert a layer of hidden nodes moving from a single-layer network to a multi-layer network. but introducing a non-linearity at inner layers this will give us non-linear decision boundaires. in fact such networks are able to express almost any function we want not just linear functions. the trade-off for this flexibility is increased complexity in parameter tuning and model design. bio-inspired multi-layer networks one of the major weaknesses of linear models like perceptron and the regularized linear models from the previous chapter is that they are linear! namely they are unable to learn arbitrary decision boundaries. in contrast decision trees and knn could learn arbitrarily complicated decision boundaries. one approach to doing this is to chain together a collection of perceptrons to build more complex neural networks. an example of a two-layer network is shown in figure here you can see five inputs that are fed into two hidden units. these hidden units are then fed in to a single output unit. each edge in this figure corresponds to a different weight. though it looks like there are three layers this is called a two-layer network because we don t count learning objectives explain the biological inspiration for multi-layer neural networks. construct a two-layer network that can solve the xor problem. implement the back-propogation algorithm for training multi-layer networks. explain the trade-off between depth and breadth in network structure. contrast neural networks with radial basis functions with k-nearest neighbor learning. dependencies figure picture of a two-layer network with inputs and two hidden units the inputs as a real layer. that is it s two layers of trained weights. prediction with a neural network is a straightforward generalization of prediction with a perceptron. first you compute activations of the nodes in the hidden unit based on the inputs and the input weights. then you compute activations of the output unit given the hidden unit activations and the second layer of weights. the only major difference between this computation and the per ceptron computation is that the hidden units compute a non-linear function of their inputs. this is usually called the activation function or link function. more formally if wid is the weights on the edge connecting input d to hidden unit i then the activation of hidden unit i is computed as hi f x where f is the link function and wi refers to the vector of weights feeding in to node i. one example link function is the sign function. that is if the incoming signal is negative the activation is otherwise the activation is this is a potentially useful activiation function but you might already have guessed the problem with it it is nondifferentiable. explain bias!!! a more popular link function is the hyperbolic tangent function tanh. a comparison between the sign function and the tanh function is in figure as you can see it is a reasonable approximation to the sign function but is convenient in that it is because it looks like an s and because the greek character for s is sigma such functions are usually called sigmoid functions. assuming for now that we are using tanh as the link function the overall prediction made by a two-layer network can be computed using algorithm this function takes a matrix of weights w corresponding to the first layer weights and a vector of weights v corresponding to the second layer. you can write this entire computation out in one line as vi tanhwi x y i v tanhw x where the second line is short hand assuming that tanh can take a vector as input and product a vector as output. neural networks figure picture of sign versus tanh it s derivative is just is it necessary to use a link function at all? what would happen if you just used the identify function as a link? a course in machine learning algorithm twolayernetworkpredictw v x for i to number of hidden units do end for return v h hi tanhwi x compute activation of hidden unit i compute output unit the claim is that two-layer neural networks are more expressive than single layer networks perceptrons. to see this you can construct a very small two-layer network for solving the xor problem. for simplicity suppose that the data set consists of four data points given in table the classification rule is that y if an only if where the features are just to achieve the or behavior you can start by setting the bias to you can solve this problem using a two layer network with two hidden units. the key idea is to make the first hidden unit compute an or function the second hidden unit can compute an and function the the output can combine these into a single prediction that mimics xor. once you have the first hidden unit activate for or and the second for and you need only set the output weights as and respectively. and the weights for the two real features as both being you can check for yourself that this will do the right thing if the link function were the sign function. of course it s not it s tanh. to get tanh to mimic sign you need to make the dot product either really really large or really really small. you can accomplish this by setting the bias to and both of the two weights to now the activation of this unit will be just slightly above for x and just slightly below for the other three examples. at this point you ve seen that one-layer networks perceptrons can represent any linear function and only linear functions. you ve also seen that two-layer networks can represent non-linear functions like xor. a natural question is do you get additional representational power by moving beyond two layers? the answer is partially provided in the following theorem due originally to george cybenko for one particular type of link function and extended later by kurt hornik to arbitrary link functions. theorem networks are universal function approximators. let f be a continuous function on a bounded subset of d-dimensional space. then there exists a two-layer neural network f with a finite number of hidden units that approximate f arbitrarily well. namely for all x in the domain of or in colloquial terms two-layer networks can approximate any y table small xor data set. verify that these output weights will actually give you xor. this shows how to create an or function. how can you create an and function? neural networks function. this is a remarkable theorem. practically it says that if you give me a function f and some error tolerance parameter i can construct a two layer network that computes f. in a sense it says that going from one layer to two layers completely changes the representational capacity of your model. when working with two-layer networks the key question is how many hidden units should i have? if your data is d dimensional and you have k hidden units then the total number of parameters is first is from the bias the second is from the second layer of weights. following on from the heuristic that you should have one to two examples for each parameter you are trying to estimate this suggests a method for choosing the number of hidden units as roughly n in other words if you have tons and tons of examples you can safely have lots of hidden units. if you only have a few examples you should probably restrict the number of hidden units in your network. the number of units is both a form of inductive bias and a form of regularization. in both view the number of hidden units controls how complex your function will be. lots of hidden units very complicated function. figure shows training and test error for neural networks trained with different numbers of hidden units. as the number increases training performance continues to get better. but at some point test performance gets worse because the network has overfit the data. the back-propagation algorithm the back-propagation algorithm is a classic approach to training neural networks. although it was not originally seen this way based on what you know from the last chapter you can summarize backpropagation as back-propagation gradient descent chain rule more specifically the set up is exactly the same as before. you are going to optimize the weights in the network to minimize some objective function. the only difference is that the predictor is no longer linear y w x b but now non-linear v tanhw x. the only question is how to do gradient descent on this more complicated objective. for now we will ignore the idea of regularization. this is for two reasons. the first is that you already know how to deal with regularization so everything you ve learned before applies. the second is that historically neural networks have not been regularized. instead a course in machine learning people have used early stopping as a method for controlling overfitting. presently it s not obvious which is a better solution both are valid options. to be completely explicit we will focus on optimizing squared error. again this is mostly for historic reasons. you could easily replace squared error with your loss function of choice. our overall objective is min wv n yn i vi f xn here f is some link function like tanh. the easy case is to differentiate this with respect to v the weights for the output unit. without even doing any math you should be able to guess what this looks like. the way to think about it is that from vs perspective it is just a linear model attempting to minimize squared error. the only funny thing is that its inputs are the activations h rather than the examples x. so the gradient with respect to v is just as for the linear case. to make things notationally more convenient let en denote the error on the nth example the blue term above and let hn denote the vector of hidden unit activations on that example. then v n enhn this is exactly like the linear case. one way of interpreting this is how would the output weights have to change to make the prediction better? this is an easy question to answer because they can easily measure how their changes affect the output. the more complicated aspect to deal with is the weights corre sponding to the first layer. the reason this is difficult is because the weights in the first layer aren t necessarily trying to produce specific values say or or they are simply trying to produce activations that get fed to the output layer. so the change they want to make depends crucially on how the output layer interprets them. thankfully the chain rule of calculus saves us. ignoring the sum over data points we can compute vi f x lw y i l fi fi wi y i f xx l wi l fi fi wi vi evi vi f x neural networks algorithm twolayernetworktraind k maxiter w d k matrix of small random values v k-vector of small random values for iter maxiter do g d k matrix of zeros g k-vector of zeros for all d do for i to k do ai wi x hi tanhai initialize input layer weights initialize output layer weights initialize input layer gradient initialize output layer gradient end for w w g end for v v g end for return w v end for y v h e y y g g eh for i to k do gi gi compute activation of hidden unit i compute output unit compute error update gradient for output layer update gradient for input layer update input layer weights update output layer weights putting this together we get that the gradient with respect to wi is wi evi f xx intuitively you can make sense of this. if the overall error of the predictor is small you want to make small steps. if vi is small for hidden unit i then this means that the output is not particularly sensitive to the activation of the ith hidden unit. thus its gradient should be small. if vi flips sign the gradient at wi should also flip signs. the name back-propagation comes from the fact that you propagate gradients backward through the network starting at the end. the complete instantiation of gradient descent for a two layer network with k hidden units is sketched in algorithm note that this really is exactly a gradient descent algorithm the only different is that the computation of the gradients of the input layer is moderately complicated. as a bit of practical advice implementing the back-propagation algorithm can be a bit tricky. sign errors often abound. a useful trick is first to keep w fixed and work on just training v. then keep v fixed and work on training w. then put them together. what would happen to this algorithm if you wanted to optimize exponential loss instead of squared error? what if you wanted to add in weight regularization? if you like matrix calculus derive the same algorithm starting from eq a course in machine learning initialization and convergence of neural networks based on what you know about linear models you might be tempted to initialize all the weights in a neural network to zero. you might also have noticed that in algorithm this is not what s done they re initialized to small random values. the question is why? the answer is because an initialization of w and v will lead to uninteresting solutions. in other words if you initialize the model in this way it will eventually get stuck in a bad local optimum. to see this first realize that on any example x the activation hi of the hidden units will all be zero since w this means that on the first iteration the gradient on the output weights will be zero so they will stay put. furthermore the gradient for the dth feature on the ith unit will be exactly the same as the gradient for the same feature on the second unit. this means that the weight matrix after a gradient step will change in exactly the same way for every hidden unit. thinking through this example for iterations the values of the hidden units will always be exactly the same which means that the weights feeding in to any of the hidden units will be exactly the same. eventually the model will converge but it will converge to a solution that does not take advantage of having access to the hidden units. this shows that neural networks are sensitive to their initialization. in particular the function that they optimize is non-convex meaning that it might have plentiful local optima. of which is the trivial local optimum described in the preceding paragraph. in a sense neural networks must have local optima. suppose you have a two layer network with two hidden units that s been optimized. you have weights from inputs to the first hidden unit weights from inputs to the second hidden unit and weights from the hidden units to the output. if i give you back another network with and swapped and and swapped the network computes exactly the same thing but with a markedly different weight structure. this phenomena is known as symmetric modes mode referring to an optima meaning that there are symmetries in the weight space. it would be one thing if there were lots of modes and they were all symmetric then finding one of them would be as good as finding any other. unfortunately there are additional local optima that are not global optima. random initialization of the weights of a network is a way to address both of these problems. by initializing a network with small random weights uniform between and the network is unlikely to fall into the trivial symmetric local optimum. moreover by training a collection of networks each with a different random figure convergence of randomly initialized networks initialization you can often obtain better solutions that with just one initialization. in other words you can train ten networks with different random seeds and then pick the one that does best on heldout data. figure shows prototypical test-set performance for ten networks with different random initialization plus an eleventh plot for the trivial symmetric network initialized with zeros. one of the typical complaints about neural networks is that they are finicky. in particular they have a rather large number of knobs to tune the number of layers the number of hidden units per layer the gradient descent learning rate the initialization the stopping iteration or weight regularization the last of these is minor stopping is an easy regularization method that does not require much effort to tune but the others are somewhat significant. even for two layer networks having to choose the number of hidden units and then get the learning rate and initialization right can take a bit of work. clearly it can be automated but nonetheless it takes time. another difficulty of neural networks is that their weights can be difficult to interpret. you ve seen that for linear networks you can often interpret high weights as indicative of positive examples and low weights as indicative of negative examples. in multilayer networks it becomes very difficult to try to understand what the different hidden units are doing. beyond two layers the definition of neural networks and the back-propagation algorithm can be generalized beyond two layers to any arbitrary directed acyclic graph. in practice it is most common to use a layered network like that shown in figure unless one has a very strong reason inductive bias to do something different. however the view as a directed graph sheds a different sort of insight on the backpropagation algorithm. suppose that your network structure is stored in some directed acyclic graph like that in figure we index nodes in this graph as u v. the activation before applying non-linearity at a node is au and after non-linearity is hu. the graph has a single sink which is the output node y with activation ay non-linearity is performed neural networks figure multi-layer network figure dag network a course in machine learning hu corresponding feature of x algorithm forwardpropagationx for all input nodes u do end for for all nodes v in the network whose parent s are computed do av u parv wuvhu hv tanhav end for return ay algorithm backpropagationx y run forwardpropagationx to compute activations ey y ay for all nodes v in the network whose error ev is computed do for all u parv do compute overall network error guv evhu compute gradient of this edge eu eu compute the error of the parent node end for end for return all gradients ge on the output unit. the graph has d-many inputs nodes with no parent whose activations hu are given by an input example. an edge v is from a parent to a child from an input to a hidden unit or from a hidden unit to the sink. each edge has a weight wuv. we say that paru is the set of parents of u. there are two relevant algorithms forward-propagation and back propagation. forward-propagation tells you how to compute the activation of the sink y given the inputs. back-propagation computes derivatives of the edge weights for a given input. the key aspect of the forward-propagation algorithm is to iteratively compute activations going deeper and deeper in the dag. once the activations of all the parents of a node u have been computed you can compute the activation of node u. this is spelled out in algorithm this is also explained pictorially in figure back-propagation algorithm does the opposite it com putes gradients top-down in the network. the key idea is to compute an error for each node in the network. the error at the output unit is the true error. for any input unit the error is the amount of gradient that we see coming from our children higher in the network. these errors are computed backwards in the network the name back-propagation along with the gradients themselves. this is also explained pictorially in figure given the back-propagation algorithm you can directly run gradi ent descent using it as a subroutine for computing the gradients. figure picture of forward prop figure picture of back prop breadth versus depth at this point you ve seen how to train two-layer networks and how to train arbitrary networks. you ve also seen a theorem that says that two-layer networks are universal function approximators. this begs the question if two-layer networks are so great why do we care about deeper networks? to understand the answer we can borrow some ideas from cs theory namely the idea of circuit complexity. the goal is to show that there are functions for which it might be a good idea to use a deep network. in other words there are functions that will require a huge number of hidden units if you force the network to be shallow but can be done in a small number of units if you allow it to be deep. the example that we ll use is the parity function which ironically enough is just a generalization of the xor problem. the function is defined over binary inputs as xd mod parityx d if the number of in x is odd if the number of in x is even it is easy to define a circuit of depth d with od-many gates for computing the parity function. each gate is an xor arranged in a complete binary tree as shown in figure you want to disallow xor as a gate you can fix this by allowing the depth to be doubled and replacing each xor with an and or and not combination like you did at the beginning of this chapter. this shows that if you are allowed to be deep you can construct a circuit with that computes parity using a number of hidden units that is linear in the dimensionality. so can you do the same with shallow circuits? the answer is no. it s a famous result of circuit complexity that parity requires exponentially many gates to compute in constant depth. the formal theorem is below theorem function complexity. any circuit of depth k d that computes the parity function of d input bits must contain oed gates. this is a very famous result because it shows that constant-depth circuits are less powerful that deep circuits. although a neural network isn t exactly the same as a circuit the is generally believed that the same result holds for neural networks. at the very least this gives a strong indication that depth might be an important consideration in neural networks. one way of thinking about the issue of breadth versus depth has to do with the number of parameters that need to be estimated. by neural networks figure nnetparitydeep deep function for computing parity what is it about neural networks that makes it so that the theorem about circuits does not apply directly? a course in machine learning the heuristic that you need roughly one or two examples for every parameter a deep model could potentially require exponentially fewer examples to train than a shallow model! this now flips the question if deep is potentially so much better why doesn t everyone use deep networks? there are at least two answers. first it makes the architecture selection problem more significant. namely when you use a two-layer network the only hyperparameter to choose is how many hidden units should go in the middle layer. when you choose a deep network you need to choose how many layers and what is the width of all those layers. this can be somewhat daunting. a second issue has to do with training deep models with backpropagation. in general as back-propagation works its way down through the model the sizes of the gradients shrink. you can work this out mathematically but the intuition is simpler. if you are the beginning of a very deep network changing one single weight is unlikely to have a significant effect on the output since it has to go through so many other units before getting there. this directly implies that the derivatives are small. this in turn means that backpropagation essentially never moves far from its initialization when run on very deep networks. finding good ways to train deep networks is an active research area. there are two general strategies. the first is to attempt to initialize the weights better often by a layer-wise initialization strategy. this can be often done using unlabeled data. after this initialization back-propagation can be run to tweak the weights for whatever classification problem you care about. a second approach is to use a more complex optimization procedure rather than gradient descent. you will learn about some such procedures later in this book. basis functions at this point we ve seen that neural networks can mimic linear functions and they can learn more complex functions. a reasonable question is whether they can mimic a knn classifier and whether they can do it efficiently with not-too-many hidden units. a natural way to train a neural network to mimic a knn classifier while these small derivatives might make training difficult they might be good for other reasons what reasons? is to replace the sigmoid link function with a radial basis function in a sigmoid network a network with sigmoid links the hidden units were computed as hi tanhwi x in an rbf network the hidden units are computed as i hi exp in other words the hidden units behave like little gaussian bumps centered around locations specified by the vectors wi. a one-dimensional example is shown in figure the parameter i specifies the width of the gaussian bump. if i is large then only data points that are really close to wi have non-zero activations. to distinguish sigmoid networks from rbf networks the hidden units are typically drawn with sigmoids or with gaussian bumps as in figure training rbf networks involves finding good values for the gassian widths i the centers of the gaussian bumps wi and the connections between the gaussian bumps and the output unit v. this can all be done using back-propagation. the gradient terms for v remain unchanged from before the the derivates for the other variables differ exercise one of the big questions with rbf networks is where should the gaussian bumps be centered? one can of course apply backpropagation to attempt to find the centers. another option is to specify them ahead of time. for instance one potential approach is to have one rbf unit per data point centered on that data point. if you carefully choose the s and vs you can obtain something that looks nearly identical to distance-weighted knn by doing so. this has the added advantage that you can go futher and use back-propagation to learn good gaussian widths and voting factors for the nearest neighbor algorithm. exercises exercise todo. neural networks figure nnetrbfpicture a one-d picture of rbf bumps figure nnetunitsymbols picture of nnet with sigmoidrbf units consider an rbf network with one hidden unit per training point centered at that point. what bad thing might happen if you use backpropagation to estimate the s and v on this data if you re not careful? how could you be careful? kernel methods learning objectives explain how kernels generalize both feature combinations and basis functions. contrast dot products with kernel products. implement kernelized perceptron. derive a kernelized version of regularized least squares regression. implement a kernelized version of the perceptron. derive the dual formulation of the support vector machine. dependencies linear models are great because they are easy to understand and easy to optimize. they suffer because they can only learn very simple decision boundaries. neural networks can learn more complex decision boundaries but lose the nice convexity properties of many linear models. one way of getting a linear model to behave non-linearly is to transform the input. for instance by adding feature pairs as additional inputs. learning a linear model on such a representation is convex but is computationally prohibitive in all but very low dimensional spaces. you might ask instead of explicitly expanding the feature space is it possible to stay with our original data representation and do all the feature blow up implicitly? surprisingly the answer is often yes and the family of techniques that makes this possible are known as kernel approaches. from feature combinations to kernels in section you learned one method for increasing the expressive power of linear models explode the feature space. for instance a quadratic feature explosion might map a feature vector x to an expanded version denoted that there are repetitions here but hopefully most learning algorithms can deal well with redundant features in particular the terms are due to collapsing some repetitions. kernel methods you could then train a classifier on this expanded feature space. there are two primary concerns in doing so. the first is computational if your learning algorithm scales linearly in the number of features then you ve just squared the amount of computation you need to perform you ve also squared the amount of memory you ll need. the second is statistical if you go by the heuristic that you should have about two examples for every feature then you will now need quadratically many training examples in order to avoid overfitting. this chapter is all about dealing with the computational issue. it will turn out in chapter that you can also deal with the statistical issue for now you can just hope that regularization will be sufficient to attenuate overfitting. the key insight in kernel-based learning is that you can rewrite many linear models in a way that doesn t require you to ever explicitly compute to start with you can think of this purely as a computational trick that enables you to use the power of a quadratic feature mapping without actually having to compute and store the mapped vectors. later you will see that it s actually quite a bit deeper. most algorithms we discuss involve a product of the form w after performing the feature mapping. the goal is to rewrite these algorithms so that they only ever depend on dot products between two examples say x and z namely they depend on to understand why this is helpful consider the quadratic expansion from above and the dot-product between two vectors. you get xdzd d xdzd e d d z x xdxezdze thus you can compute in exactly the same amount of time as you can compute x z the time it takes to perform an addition and a multiply about nanoseconds on a circa processor. the rest of the practical challenge is to rewrite your algorithms so that they only depend on dot products between examples and not on any explicit weight vectors. kernelized perceptron consider the original perceptron algorithm from chapter re peated in algorithm using linear algebra notation and using feature expansion notation in this algorithm there are two places a course in machine learning algorithm perceptrontraind maxiter w b for iter maxiter do initialize weights and bias compute activation for this example update weights update bias for all d do a w b if ya then w w y b b y end if end for end for return w b math review spans and null spaces reminder if u is a set of vectors in rd then the span of u is the set of vectors that can be written as linear combinations of uis namely spanu i aiui r ai r. the null space of u is everything that s left rdspanu todo pictures figure where is used explicitly. the first is in computing the activation and the second is in updating the weights the goal is to remove the explicit dependence of this algorithm on and on the weight vector. to do so you can observe that at any point in the algorithm the weight vector w can be written as a linear combination of expanded training data. in particular at any point w n n for some parameters initially w so choosing yields this. if the first update occurs on the nth training example then the resolution weight vector is simply yn which is equivalent to setting n yn. if the second update occurs on the mth training example then all you need to do is update m m ym. this is true even if you make multiple passes over the data. this observation leads to the following representer theorem which states that the weight vector of the perceptron lies in the span of the training data. theorem representer theorem. during a run of the perceptron algorithm the weight vector w is always in the span of the non-empty training data proof of theorem by induction. base case the span of any nonempty set contains the zero vector which is the initial weight vector. inductive case suppose that the theorem is true before the kth update and suppose that the kth update happens on example n. by the inductive hypothesis you can write w i i before kernel methods algorithm kernelizedperceptrontraind maxiter b for iter maxiter do for all d do initialize coefficients and bias a m m b if yna then n n yn b b y compute activation for this example update coefficients update bias end if end for end for return b the update. the new weight vector is i i yn i i yni n which is still in the span of the training data. now that you know that you can always write w n n for some is you can additionall compute the activations as w b n n b b n n definition of w dot products are linear this now depends only on dot-products between data points and never explicitly requires a weight vector. you can now rewrite the entire perceptron algorithm so that it never refers explicitly to the weights and only ever depends on pairwise dot products between examples. this is shown in algorithm the advantage to this kernelized algorithm is that you can per form feature expansions like the quadratic feature expansion from the introduction for free. for example for exactly the same cost as the quadratic features you can use a cubic feature map computed x which corresponds to three-way interas actions between variables. in general you can do so for any polynomial degree p at the same computational complexity. kernelized k-means for a complete change of pace consider the k-means algorithm from section this algorithm is for clustering where there is no notion of training labels. instead you want to partition the data into coherent clusters. for data in rd it involves randomly initializing k-many a course in machine learning cluster means the algorithm then alternates between the following two steps until convergence with x replaced by since that is the eventual goal for each example n set cluster label zn arg mink for each cluster k update nk nznk where nk is the number of n with zn k. the question is whether you can perform these steps without explicitly computing the representer theorem is more straightforward here than in the perceptron. the mean of a set of data is almost by definition in the span of that data the ais all to be equal to thus so long as you initialize the means in the span of the data you are guaranteed always to have the means in the span of the data. given this you know that you can write each mean as an expansion of the data say that n n for some parameters n are n k-many such parameters. given this expansion in order to execute step you need to compute norms. this can be done as follows m m zn arg min k arg min k arg min k m m m m definition of zn definition of expand quadratic term linearity and constant k m m arg min m const this computation can replace the assignments in step of k-means. the mean updates are more direct in step m nk if zn k otherwise nk nznk n what makes a kernel a kernel is just a form of generalized dot product. you can also think of it as simply shorthand for which is commonly written k z. or when is clear from context simply kx z. kernel methods this is often refered to as the kernel product between x and z the mapping in this view what you ve seen in the preceding two sections is that you can rewrite both the perceptron algorithm and the k-means algorithm so that they only ever depend on kernel products between data points and never on the actual datapoints themselves. this is a very powerful notion as it has enabled the development of a large number of non-linear algorithms essentially for free applying the so-called kernel trick that you ve just seen twice. this raises an interesting question. if you have rewritten these algorithms so that they only depend on the data through a function k x x r can you stick any function k in these algorithms or are there some k that are forbidden? in one sense you could use any k but the real question is for what types of functions k do these algorithms retain the properties that we expect them to have convergence optimality etc.? one way to answer this question is to say that k is a valid kernel if it corresponds to the inner product between two vectors. that is k is valid if there exists a function such that kx z this is a direct definition and it should be clear that if k satisfies this then the algorithms go through as expected this is how we derived them. you ve already seen the general class of polynomial kernels which have the form kpoly d z x z where d is a hyperparameter of the kernel. these kernels correspond to polynomial feature expansions. there is an alternative characterization of a valid kernel function that is more mathematical. it states that k x x r is a kernel if k is positive semi-definite in shorthand psd. this property is also sometimes called mercer s condition. in this context this means the for all functions f that are square integrable f other than the zero function the following property holds f z f this likely seems like it came out of nowhere. unfortunately the connection is well beyond the scope of this book but is covered well is external sources. for now simply take it as a given that this is an equivalent requirement. those so inclined the appendix of this book gives a proof but it requires a bit of knowledge of function spaces to understand. the question is why is this alternative characterization useful? it is useful because it gives you an alternative way to construct kernel a course in machine learning functions. for instance using it you can easily prove the following which would be difficult from the definition of kernels as inner products after feature mappings. theorem addition. if and are kernels the k defined by kx z z z is also a kernel. proof of theorem you need to verify the positive semi-definite property on k. you can do this as follows f z f f z z f definition of k f z f f z f distributive rule and are psd more generally any positive linear combination of kernels is still a kernel. specifically if km are all kernels and m then kx z m mkmx z is also a kernel. you can also use this property to show that the following gaus sian kernel called the rbf kernel is also psd krbf z exp here is a hyperparameter that controls the width of this gaussianlike bumps. to gain an intuition for what the rbf kernel is doing consider what prediction looks like in the perceptron f n n nkxn x b n exp in this computation each training example is getting to vote on the label of the test point x. the amount of vote that the nth training example gets is proportional to the negative exponential of the distance between the test point and itself. this is very much like an rbf neural network in which there is a gaussian bump at each training example with variance and where the ns act as the weights connecting these rbf bumps to the output. showing that this kernel is positive definite is a bit of an exercise in analysis integration by parts but otherwise not difficult. again the proof is provided in the appendix. kernel methods so far you have seen two bsaic classes of kernels polynomial kernels vz x zd which includes the linear kernel z x z and rbf kernels z exp the former have a direct connection to feature expansion the latter to rbf networks. you also know how to combine kernels to get new kernels by addition. in fact you can do more than that the product of two kernels is also a kernel. as far as a library of kernels goes there are many. polynomial and rbf are by far the most popular. a commonly used but technically invalid kernel is the hyperbolic-tangent kernel which mimics the behavior of a two-layer neural network. it is defined as ktanh x z warning not psd a final example which is not very common but is nonetheless interesting is the all-subsets kernel. suppose that your d features are all binary all take values or let a d be a subset of features and let fax d a xd be the conjunction of all the features in a. let be a feature vector over all such as so that there are features in the vector you can compute the kernel associated with this feature mapping as ksubsx z d xdzd verifying the relationship between this kernel and the all-subsets feature mapping is left as an exercise closely resembles the expansion for the quadratic kernel. support vector machines kernelization predated support vector machines but svms are definitely the model that popularized the idea. recall the definition of the soft-margin svm from chapter and in particular the optimization problem which attempts to balance a large margin with a small loss ns where n is the slack on the nth training example. this problem is repeated below n min wb c n subj. to yn xn b n n n n previously you optimized this by explicitly computing the slack variables n given a solution to the decision boundary w and b. however you are now an expert with using lagrange multipliers a course in machine learning to optimize constrained problems! the overall goal is going to be to rewrite the svm optimization problem in a way that it no longer explicitly depends on the weights w and only depends on the examples xn through kernel products. there are constraints in this optimization one for each slack constraint and one for the requirement that the slacks are nonnegative. unlike the last time these constraints are now inequalities which require a slightly different solution. first you rewrite all the inequalities so that they read as something and then add corresponding lagrange multipliers. the main difference is that the lagrange multipliers are now constrained to be non-negative and their sign in the augmented objective function matters. the second set of constraints is already in the proper form the first set can be rewritten as yn xn b n you re now ready to construct the lagrangian using multipliers n for the first set of constraints and n for the second set. lw b n n n c n n n n xn b n the new optimization problem is min wb max max lw b the intuition is exactly the same as before. if you are able to find a solution that satisfies the constraints the purple term is properly non-negative then the ns cannot do anything to hurt the solution. on the other hand if the purple term is negative then the corresponding n can go to breaking the solution. you can solve this problem by taking gradients. this is a bit te dious but and important step to realize how everything fits together. since your goal is to remove the dependence on w the first step is to take a gradient with respect to w set it equal to zero and solve for w in terms of the other variables. wl w n nynxn w n nynxn at this point you should immediately recognize a similarity to the kernelized perceptron the optimal weight vector takes exactly the same form in both algorithms. you can now take this new expression for w and plug it back in to the expression for l thus removing w from consideration. to avoid subscript overloading you should replace the n in the expression for kernel methods w with say m. this yields lb m n m mymxm n yn c n n n n n mymxm xn b n at this point it s convenient to rewrite these terms be sure you understand where the following comes from lb n m n n mynymxn xm n mynymxn xm m n n n n n n n mynymxn xm n m b nyn n n n n n n n things are starting to look good you ve successfully removed the dependence on w and everything is now written in terms of dot products between input vectors! this might still be a difficult problem to solve so you need to continue and attempt to remove the remaining variables b and the derivative with respect to b is l b n nyn this doesn t allow you to substitute b with something you did with w but it does mean that the fourth term n nyn goes to zero at the optimum. the last of the original variables is n the derivatives in this case look like l n c n n c n n again this doesn t allow you to substitute but it does mean that you can rewrite the second term which as nc n n as n n n. this then cancels with of the final term. however you need to be careful to remember something. when we optimize both n and n are constrained to be non-negative. what this means is that since we are dropping from the optimization we need to ensure that n c otherwise the corresponding will need to be negative which is not a course in machine learning allowed. you finally wind up with the following where xn xm has been replaced by kxn xm l n n n m n mynymkxn xm if you are comfortable with matrix notation this has a very compact form. let denote the n-dimensional vector of all let y denote the vector of labels and let g be the n n matrix where gnm ynymkxn xm then this has the following form l the resulting optimization problem is to maximize l as a function of subject to the constraint that the ns are all non-negative and less than c of the constraint added when removing the variables. thus your problem is min l subj. to n c n m n mynymkxn xm n n n one way to solve this problem is gradient descent on the only complication is making sure that the s satisfy the constraints. in this case you can use a projected gradient algorithm after each gradient update you adjust your parameters to satisfy the constraints by projecting them into the feasible region. in this case the projection is trivial if after a gradient step any n simply set it to if any n c set it to c. understanding support vector machines the prior discussion involved quite a bit of math to derive a representation of the support vector machine in terms of the lagrange variables. this mapping is actually sufficiently standard that everything in it has a name. the original problem variables b are called the primal variables the lagrange variables are called the dual variables. the optimization problem that results after removing all of the primal variables is called the dual problem. a succinct way of saying what you ve done is you found that after converting the svm into its dual it is possible to kernelize. to understand svms a first step is to peek into the dual formulation eq the objective has two terms the first depends on the data and the second depends only on the dual variables. the first thing to notice is that because of the second term the s want to kernel methods get as large as possible. the constraint ensures that they cannot exceed c which means that the general tendency is for the s to grow as close to c as possible. to further understand the dual optimization problem it is useful to think of the kernel as being a measure of similarity between two data points. this analogy is most clear in the case of rbf kernels but even in the case of linear kernels if your examples all have unit norm then their dot product is still a measure of similarity. since you can write the prediction function as f x sign n nynkxn x it is natural to think of n as the importance of training example n where n means that it is not used at all at test time. consider two data points that have the same label namely yn ym. this means that ynym and the objective function has a term that looks like n mkxn xm. since the goal is to make this term small then one of two things has to happen either k has to be small or n m has to be small. if k is already small then this doesn t affect the setting of the corresponding s. but if k is large then this strongly encourages at least one of n or m to go to zero. so if you have two data points that are very similar and have the same label at least one of the corresponding s will be small. this makes intuitive sense if you have two data points that are basically the same in the x and y sense then you only need to keep one of them around. suppose that you have two data points with different labels ynym again if kxn xm is small nothing happens. but if it is large then the corresponding s are encouraged to be as large as possible. in other words if you have two similar examples with different labels you are strongly encouraged to keep the corresponding s as large as c. an alternative way of understanding the svm dual problem is geometrically. remember that the whole point of introducing the variable n was to ensure that the nth training example was correctly classified modulo slack. more formally the goal of n is to ensure that ynw xn b n suppose that this constraint it not satisfied. there is an important result in optimization theory called the karush-kuhn-tucker conditions kkt conditions for short that states that at the optimum the product of the lagrange multiplier for a constraint and the value of that constraint will equal zero. in this case this says that at the optimum you have yn xn b n n in order for this to be true it means that least one of the following must be true n or yn xn b n a course in machine learning a reasonable question to ask is under what circumstances will n be non-zero? from the kkt conditions you can discern that n can be non-zero only when the constraint holds exactly namely that yn xn b n when does that constraint hold exactly? it holds exactly only for those points precisely on the margin of the hyperplane. in other words the only training examples for which n are those that lie precisely unit away from the maximum margin decision boundary! those that are moved there by the corresponding slack. these points are called the support vectors because they support the decision boundary. in general the number of support vectors is far smaller than the number of training examples and therefore you naturally end up with a solution that only uses a subset of the training data. from the first discussion you know that the points that wind up being support vectors are exactly those that are confusable in the sense that you have to examples that are nearby but have different labels. this is a completely in line with the previous discussion. if you have a decision boundary it will pass between these confusable points and therefore they will end up being part of the set of support vectors. exercises exercise todo. learning theory learning objectives explain why inductive bias is necessary. define the pac model and explain why both the p and a are necessary. explain the relationship between complexity measures and regularizers. identify the role of complexity in generalization. formalize the relationship between margins and complexity. dependencies for nothing ought to be posited without a reason given unless it is self-evident or known by experience or proved by the authority of sacred scripture. william of occam c. by now you are an expert at building learning algorithms. you probably understand how they work intuitively. and you understand why they should generalize. however there are several basic questions you might want to know the answer to. is learning always possible? how many training examples will i need to do a good job learning? is my test performance going to be much worse than my training performance? the key idea that underlies all these answer is that simple functions generalize well. the amazing thing is that you can actually prove strong results that address the above questions. in this chapter you will learn some of the most important results in learning theory that attempt to answer these questions. the goal of this chapter is not theory for theory s sake but rather as a way to better understand why learning models work and how to use this theory to build better algorithms. as a concrete example we will see how regularization provably leads to better generalization performance thus justifying our common practice! the role of theory in contrast to the quote at the start of this chapter a practitioner friend once said i would happily give up a few percent performance for an algorithm that i can understand. both perspectives are completely valid and are actually not contradictory. the second statement is presupposing that theory helps you understand which hopefully you ll find to be the case in this chapter. theory can serve two roles. it can justify and help understand why common practice works. this is the theory after view. it can also serve to suggest new algorithms and approaches that turn out to work well in practice. this is the theory before view. often it turns out to be a mix. practitioners discover something that works surprisingly well. theorists figure out why it works and prove something about it. and in the process they make it better or find new algo a course in machine learning rithms that more directly exploit whatever property it is that made the theory go through. theory can also help you understand what s possible and what s not possible. one of the first things we ll see is that in general machine learning can not work. of course it does work so this means that we need to think harder about what it means for learning algorithms to work. by understanding what s not possible you can focus our energy on things that are. probably the biggest practical success story for theoretical machine learning is the theory of boosting which you won t actually see in this chapter. ll have to wait for chapter boosting is a very simple style of algorithm that came out of theoretical machine learning and has proven to be incredibly successful in practice. so much so that it is one of the de facto algorithms to run when someone gives you a new data set. in fact in yoav freund and rob schapire won the acm s paris kanellakis award for their boosting algorithm adaboost. this award is given for theoretical accomplishments that have had a significant and demonstrable effect on the practice of induction is impossible one nice thing about theory is that it forces you to be precise about what you are trying to do. you ve already seen a formal definition of binary classification in chapter but let s take a step back and re-analyze what it means to learn to do binary classification. from an algorithmic perspective a natural question is whether there is an ultimate learning algorithm aawesome that solves the binary classification problem above. in other words have you been wasting your time learning about knn and perceptron and decision trees when aawesome is out there. what would such an ultimate learning algorithm do? you would like it to take in a data set d and produce a function f no matter what d looks like this function f should get perfect classification on all future examples drawn from the same distribution that produced d. a little bit of introspection should demonstrate that this is impossible. for instance there might be label noise in our distribution. as a very simple example let x a one-dimensional binary distribution. define the data distribution as in other words of data points in this distrubtion have x y in corinna cortes and vladimir vapnik won it for support vector machines. learning theory it s clear that if your algorithm produces a deterministic function that it cannot do better than error. what if it produces a stochastic randomized function? leslie valiant invented the notion of pac learning in in he received the turing award the highest honor in computing for his work in learning theory computational complexity and parallel systems. and don t. no matter what function your learning algorithm produces there s no way that it can do better than error on this data. given this it seems hopeless to have an algorithm aawesome that always achieves an error rate of zero. the best that we can hope is that the error rate is not too large. unfortunately simply weakening our requirement on the error rate is not enough to make learning possible. the second source of difficulty comes from the fact that the only access we have to the data distribution is through sampling. in particular when trying to learn about a distribution like that in you only get to see data points drawn from that distribution. you know that eventually you will see enough data points that your sample is representative of the distribution but it might not happen immediately. for instance even though a fair coin will come up heads only with probability it s completely plausible that in a sequence of four coin flips you never see a tails or perhaps only see one tails. aawesome will always work. in particular if we happen to get a lousy sample of data from d we need to allow aawesome to do something completely unreasonable. thus we cannot hope that aawesome will do perfectly every time. we cannot even hope that it will do pretty well all of the time. nor can we hope that it will do perfectly most of the time. the best best we can reasonably hope of aawesome is that it it will do pretty well most of the time. so the second thing that we have to give up is the hope that probably approximately correct learning probably approximately correct learning is a formalism of inductive learning based on the realization that the best we can hope of an algorithm is that it does a good job is approximately correct most of the time it is probably appoximately consider a hypothetical learning algorithm. you run it on ten different binary classification data sets. for each one it comes back with functions for some reason whenever you run on a test point it crashes your computer. for the other learned functions their performance on test data is always at most error. if this situtation is guaranteed to happen then this hypothetical learning algorithm is a pac learning algorithm. it satisfies probably because it only failed in one out of ten cases and it s approximate because it achieved low but non-zero error on the remainder of the cases. this leads to the formal definition of an pac-learning algo rithm. in this definition plays the role of measuring accuracy a course in machine learning the previous example and plays the role of measuring failure the previous definitions an algorithm a is an learning algorithm if for all distributions d given samples from d the probability that it returns a bad function is at most where a bad function is one with test error rate more than on d. there are two notions of efficiency that matter in pac learning. the first is the usual notion of computational complexity. you would prefer an algorithm that runs quickly to one that takes forever. the second is the notion of sample complexity the number of examples required for your algorithm to achieve its goals. note that the goal of both of these measure of complexity is to bound how much of a scarse resource your algorithm uses. in the computational case the resource is cpu cycles. in the sample case the resource is labeled examples. definition an algorithm a is an efficient learning algorithm if it is an learning algorithm whose runtime is polynomial in and in other words suppose that you want your algorithm to achieve error rate rather than the runtime required to do so should no go up by an exponential factor. pac learning of conjunctions to get a better sense of pac learning we will start with a completely irrelevant and uninteresting example. the purpose of this example is only to help understand how pac learning works. the setting is learning conjunctions. your data points are binary vectors for instance x someone guarantees for you that there is some boolean conjunction that defines the true labeling of this data. for instance or is not allowed. in formal terms we often call the true underlying classification function the concept. so this is saying that the concept you are trying to learn is a conjunction. in this case the boolean function would assign a negative label to the example above. since you know that the concept you are trying to learn is a conjunction it makes sense that you would represent your function as a conjunction as well. for historical reasons the function that you learn is often called a hypothesis and is often denoted h. however in keeping with the other notation in this book we will continue to denote it f formally the set up is as follows. there is some distribution dx over binary data points x there is a fixed concept conjunction c that we are trying to learn. there is no noise so for any example x its true label is simply y cx. what is a reasonable algorithm in this case? suppose that you observe the example in table from the first example we know that the true formula cannot include the term if it did this example would have to be negative which it is not. by the same reasoning it cannot include by analogous reasoning it also can neither include the term nor the term this suggests the algorithm in algorithm colloquially the learning theory y table data set for learning conjunctions. verify that algorithm maintains an invariant that it always errs on the side of classifying examples negative and never errs the other way. throw out bad terms algorithm. in this algorith you begin with a function that includes all possible terms. note that this function will initially classify everything as negative. you then process each example in sequence. on a negative example you do nothing. on a positive example you throw out terms from f that contradict the given positive example. if you run this algorithm on the data in table the sequence of f s that you cycle through are f f f f the first thing to notice about this algorithm is that after processing an example it is guaranteed to classify that example correctly. this observation requires that there is no noise in the data. the second thing to notice is that it s very computationally efficient. given a data set of n examples in d dimensions it takes ond time to process the data. this is linear in the size of the data set. however in order to be an efficient learning algorithm you need to be able to get a bound on the sample complexity of this algorithm. sure you know that its run time is linear in the number of example n. but how many examples n do you need to see in order to guarantee that it achieves an error rate of at most all but many cases? perhaps n has to be gigantic to guarantee a small error. the goal is to prove that the number of samples n required to achieve a small error is not-too-big. the general proof technique for this has essentially the same flavor as almost every pac learning proof around. first you define a bad thing. in this case a bad thing is that there is some term that should have been thrown out but wasn t. then you say well bad things happen. then you notice that if this bad thing happened you must not have a course in machine learning algorithm binaryconjunctiontraind f xd xd for all positive examples in d do for d d do if xd then else f f without term xd f f without term xd end if end for end for return f initialize function seen any positive training examples with so example with must have low probability you would have seen them. so bad things must not be that common. theorem with probability at least algorithm requires at most n examples to achieve an error rate proof of theorem let c be the concept you are trying to learn and let d be the distribution that generates the data. a learned function f can make a mistake if it contains any term t that is not in c. there are initially many terms in f and any all! of them might not be in c. we want to ensure that the probability that f makes an error is at most it is sufficient to ensure that for a term t we say that t negates an example x if tx call a term t bad if it does not appear in c and has probability at least of appearing respect to the unknown distribution d over data points. first we show that if we have no bad terms left in f then f has an error rate at most we know that f contains at most terms since is begins with terms and throws them out. the algorithm begins with terms for each variable and one for each negated variable. note that f will only make one type of error it can call positive examples negative but can never call a negative example positive. let c be the true concept boolean formula and call a term bad if it does not appear in c. a specific bad term will cause f to err only on positive examples that contain a corresponding bad value todo... finish this what we ve shown in this theorem is that if the true underly ing concept is a boolean conjunction and there is no noise then the throw out bad terms algorithm needs n examples in order learning theory to learn a boolean conjunction that is to achieve an error of at most that is to say that the sample complexity of throw out bad terms is moreover since the algorithm s runtime is linear in n it is an efficient pac learning algorithm. occam s razor simple solutions generalize the previous example of boolean conjunctions is mostly just a warmup exercise to understand pac-style proofs in a concrete setting. in this section you get to generalize the above argument to a much larger range of learning problems. we will still assume that there is no noise because it makes the analysis much simpler. t worry noise will be added eventually. william of occam c. was an english friar and philosopher is is most famous for what later became known as occam s razor and popularized by bertrand russell. the principle basically states that you should only assume as much as you need. or more verbosely if one can explain a phenomenon without assuming this or that hypothetical entity then there is no ground for assuming it i.e. that one should always opt for an explanation in terms of the fewest possible number of causes factors or variables. what occam actually wrote is the quote that began this chapter. in a machine learning context a reasonable paraphrase is simple solutions generalize well. in other words you have features you could be looking at. if you re able to explain your predictions using just of them or using all of them then you should just use the the occam s razor theorem states that this is a good idea theoretically. it essentially states that if you are learning some unknown concept and if you are able to fit your training data perfectly but you don t need to resort to a huge class of possible functions to do so then your learned function will generalize well. it s an amazing theorem due partly to the simplicity of its proof. in some ways the proof is actually easier than the proof of the boolean conjunctions though it follows the same basic argument. in order to state the theorem explicitly you need to be able to think about a hypothesis class. this is the set of possible hypotheses that your algorithm searches through to find the best one. in the case of the boolean conjunctions example the hypothesis class h is the set of all boolean formulae over d-many variables. in the case of a perceptron your hypothesis class is the set of all possible linear classifiers. the hypothesis class for boolean conjunctions is finite the hypothesis class for linear classifiers is infinite. for occam s razor we can only work with finite hypothesis classes. a course in machine learning theorem s bound. suppose a is an algorithm that learns a function f from some finite hypothesis class h. suppose the learned function always gets zero error on the training data. then the sample complexity of f is at most logh. todo comments proof of theorem todo this theorem applies directly to the throw out bad terms algorithm since the hypothesis class is finite and the learned function always achieves zero error on the training data. to apply occam s bound you need only compute the size of the hypothesis class h of boolean conjunctions. you can compute this by noticing that there are a total of possible terms in any formula in h. moreover each term may or may not be in a formula. so there are possible formulae thus applying occam s bound we see that the sample complexity of this algorithm is n of course occam s bound is general enough to capture other learning algorithms as well. in particular it can capture decision trees! in the no-noise setting a decision tree will always fit the training data perfectly. the only remaining difficulty is to compute the size of the hypothesis class of a decision tree learner. for simplicity s sake suppose that our decision tree algorithm always learns complete trees i.e. every branch from root to leaf is length d. so the number of split points in the tree places where a feature is queried is figure each split point needs to be assigned a feature there d-many choices here. this gives trees. the last thing is that there are leaves of the tree each of which can take two possible values depending on whether this leaf is classified as or this is possibilities. putting this all togeter gives a total number of trees applying occam s bound we see that todo examples is enough to learn a decision tree! complexity of infinite hypothesis spaces occam s bound is a fantastic result for learning over finite hypothesis spaces. unfortunately it is completely useless when this is because the proof works by using each of the n training examples to throw out bad hypotheses until only a small number are left. but if and you re throwing out a finite number at each step there will always be an infinite number remaining. this means that if you want to establish sample complexity results for infinite hypothesis spaces you need some new way of measuring figure thydt picture of full decision tree learning theory figure thyvcex figure with three and four examples yes this is the same vapnik who is credited with the creation of the support vector machine. what is that labeling? what is it s name? their size or complexity. a prototypical way of doing this is to measure the complexity of a hypothesis class as the number of different things it can do. as a silly example consider boolean conjunctions again. your input is a vector of binary features. however instead of representing your hypothesis as a boolean conjunction you choose to represent it as a conjunction of inequalities. that is instead of writing you write in this representation for each feature you need to choose an inequality or and a threshold. since the thresholds can be arbitrary real values there are now infinitely many possibilities however you can immediately recognize that on binary features there really is no difference between and and any other number of infinitely many possibilities. in other words even though there are infinitely many hypotheses there are only finitely many behaviors. the vapnik-chernovenkis dimension vc dimension is a classic measure of complexity of infinite hypothesis classes based on this the vc dimension is a very classification-oriented notion of complexity. the idea is to look at a finite set of unlabeled examples such as those in figure the question is no matter how these points were labeled would we be able to find a hypothesis that correctly classifies them. the idea is that as you add more points being able to represent an arbitrary labeling becomes harder and harder. for instance regardless of how the three points are labeled you can find a linear classifier that agrees with that classification. however for the four points there exists a labeling for which you cannot find a perfect classifier. the vc dimension is the maximum number of points for which you can always find such a classifier. you can think of vc dimension as a game between you and an adversary. to play this game you choose k unlabeled points however you want. then your adversary looks at those k points and assigns binary labels to them them however he wants. you must then find a hypothesis that agrees with his labeling. you win if you can find such a hypothesis he wins if you cannot. the vc dimension of your hypothesis class is the maximum number of points k so that you can always win this game. this leads to the following formal definition where you can interpret there exists as your move and for all as adversary s move. definitions for data drawn from some space x the vc dimension of a hypothesis space h over x is the maximal k such that there exists a set x x of size k such that for all binary labelings of x there exists a function f h that matches this labeling. a course in machine learning in general it is much easier to show that the vc dimension is at least some value it is much harder to show that it is at most some value. for example following on the example from figure the image of three points a little argumentation is enough to show that the vc dimension of linear classifiers in two dimension is at least three. to show that the vc dimension is exactly three it suffices to show that you cannot find a set of four points such that you win this game against the adversary. this is much more difficult. in the proof that the vc dimension is at least three you simply need to provide an example of three points and then work through the small number of possible labelings of that data. to show that it is at most three you need to argue that no matter what set of four point you pick you cannot win the game. vc margins small norms learning with noise agnostic learning error versus regret despite the fact that there s no way to get better than error on this distribution it would be nice to say that you can still learn something from it. for instance the predictor that always guesses y x seems like the right thing to do. based on this observation maybe we can rephrase the goal of learning as to find a function that does as well as the distribution allows. in other words on this data you would hope to get error. on some other distribution you would hope to get x error where x is the best you could do. this notion of best you could do is sufficiently important that it has a name the bayes error rate. this is the error rate of the best possible classifier the so-called bayes optimal classifier. if you knew the underlying distribution d you could actually write down the exact bayes optimal classifier explicitly. is why learning is uninteresting in the case that you know d. it simply has the form f bayesx if dx dx otherwise the bayes optimal error rate is the error rate that this classifier achieves f e exercises exercise todo. learning theory ensemble methods learning objectives implement bagging and explain how it reduces variance in a predictor. explain the difference between a weak learner and a strong learner. derive the adaboost algorithm. understand the relationship between boosting decision stumps and linear classification. dependencies groups of people can often make better decisions than individuals especially when group members each come in with their own biases. the same is true in machine learning. ensemble methods are learning models that achieve performance by combining the opinions of multiple learners. in doing so you can often get away with using much simpler learners and still achieve great performance. moreover ensembles are inherantly parallel which can make them much more efficient at training and test time if you have access to multiple processors. in this chapter you will learn about various ways of combining base learners into ensembles. one of the shocking results we will see is that you can take a learning model that only ever does slightly better than chance and turn it into an arbitrarily good learning model though a technique known as boosting. you will also learn how ensembles can decrease the variance of predictors as well as perform regularization. voting multiple classifiers all of the learning algorithms you have seen so far are deterministic. if you train a decision tree multiple times on the same data set you will always get the same tree back. in order to get an effect out of voting multiple classifiers they need to differ. there are two primary ways to get variability. you can either change the learning algorithm or change the data set. building an emsemble by training different classifiers is the most straightforward approach. as in single-model learning you are given a data set for classification. instead of learning a single classifier a decision tree on this data set you learn multiple different classifiers. for instance you might train a decision tree a perceptron a knn and multiple neural networks with different architectures. call these classifiers fm. at test time you can make a prediction by voting. on a test example x you compute x ensemble methods which of the classifiers you ve learned about so far have high variance? figure picture of sampling with replacement to sample with replacement imagine putting all items from d in a hat. to draw a single sample pick an element at random from that hat write it down and then put it back. ym fm x. if there are more in the list ym then you predict otherwise you predict the main advantage of ensembles of different classifiers is that it is unlikely that all classifiers will make the same mistake. in fact as long as every error is made by a minority of the classifiers you will achieve optimal classification! unfortunately the inductive biases of different learning algorithms are highly correlated. this means that different algorithms are prone to similar types of errors. in particular ensembles tend to reduce the variance of classifiers. so if you have a classification algorithm that tends to be very sensitive to small changes in the training data ensembles are likely to be useful. note that the voting scheme naturally extends to multiclass classification. however it does not make sense in the contexts of regression ranking or collective classification. this is because you will rarely see the same exact output predicted twice by two different regression models ranking models or collective classification models. for regression a simple solution is to take the mean or median prediction from the different models. for ranking and collective classification different approaches are required. instead of training different types of classifiers on the same data set you can train a single type of classifier decision tree on multiple data sets. the question is where do these multiple data sets come from since you re only given one at training time? one option is to fragment your original data set. for instance you could break it into pieces and build decision trees on each of these pieces individually. unfortunately this means that each decision tree is trained on only a very small part of the entire data set and is likely to perform poorly. a better solution is to use bootstrap resampling. this is a technique from the statistics literature based on the following observation. the data set we are given d is a sample drawn i.i.d. from an unknown distribution d. if we draw a new data set d by random sampling from d with then d is also a sample from d. figure shows the process of bootstrap resampling of ten objects. applying this idea to ensemble methods yields a technique known as bagging. you start with a single data set d that contains n training examples. from this single data set you create m-many bootstrapped training sets dm. each of these bootstrapped sets also contains n training examples drawn randomly from d with replacement. you can then train a decision tree other model seperately on each of these data sets to obtain classifiers fm. as before you can use these classifiers to vote on new test points. note that the bootstrapped data sets will be similar. however they will not be too similar. for example if n is large then the number of figure graph depicting overfitting using regularization versus bagging a course in machine learning examples that are not present in any particular bootstrapped sample is relatively large. the probability that the first training example is not selected once is the probability that it is not selected at all is as n this tends to for n this is correct to four decimal points. so only about of the original training examples will be represented in any given bootstrapped set. since bagging tends to reduce variance it provides an alternative approach to regularization. that is even if each of the learned classifiers fm are individually overfit they are likely to be overfit to different things. through voting you are able to overcome a significant portion of this overfitting. figure shows this effect by comparing regularization via hyperparameters to regularization via bagging. boosting weak learners boosting is the process of taking a crummy learning algorithm called a weak learner and turning it into a great learning algorithm a strong learner. of all the ideas that originated in the theoretical machine learning community boosting has had perhaps the greatest practical impact. the idea of boosting is reminiscent of what you me! might have thought when you first learned about file compression. if i compress a file and then re-compress it and then re-compress it eventually i ll end up with a final that s only one byte in size! to be more formal let s define a strong learning algorithm l as follows. when given a desired error rate a failure probability and access to enough labeled examples from some distribution d then with high probability least l learns a classifier f that has error at most this is precisely the definition of pac learning that you learned about in chapter building a strong learning algorithm might be difficult. we can as if instead it is possible to build a weak learning algorithm w that only has to achieve an error rate of rather than some arbitrary user-defined parameter is arbitrary anything strictly less than would be fine. work for taking a weak learning algorithm w and turning it into a strong learning algorithm. the particular boosting algorithm discussed here is adaboost short for adaptive boosting algorithm. adaboost is famous because it was one of the first practical boosting algorithms it runs in polynomial time and does not require you to define a large number of hyperparameters. it gets its name from the latter benefit it automatically adapts to the data that you give it. boosting is more of a framework than an algorithm. it s a frame ensemble methods what happens if the weak learning assumption is violated and is equal to what if it is worse than what does this mean in practice? n algorithm adaboostw d k for k k do n f w yn f n n yn exp yn n n dk n log z n end for return f x k f initialize uniform importance to each example train kth classifier on weighted data make predictions on training data compute weighted training error compute adaptive parameter re-weight examples and normalize return voted classifier the intuition behind adaboost is like studying for an exam by using a past exam. you take the past exam and grade yourself. the questions that you got right you pay less attention to. those that you got wrong you study more. then you take the exam again and repeat this process. you continually down-weight the importance of questions you routinely answer correctly and up-weight the importance of questions you routinely answer incorrectly. after going over the exam multiple times you hope to have mastered everything. the precise adaboost training algorithm is shown in algorithm the basic functioning of the algorithm is to maintain a weight distribution d over data points. a weak learner f is trained on this weighted data. that we implicitly assume that our weak learner can accept weighted training data a relatively mild assumption that is nearly always true. the error rate of f is used to determine the adaptive parameter which controls how important f is. as long as the weak learner does indeed achieve error then will be greater than zero. as the error drops to zero grows without bound. after the adaptive parameter is computed the weight distibution is updated for the next iteration. as desired examples that are correctly classified which yn yn have their weight decreased multiplicatively. examples that are incorrectly classified yn have their weight increased multiplicatively. the z term is a nomralization constant to ensure that the sum of d is one d can be interpreted as a distribution. the final classifier returned by adaboost is a weighted vote of the individual classifiers with weights given by the adaptive parameters. to better understand why is defined as it is suppose that our weak learner simply returns a constant function that returns the majority class. so if the total weight of positive examples exceeds that of negative examples f for all x otherwise f for all x. to make the problem moderately interesting suppose that in the original training set there are positive ex a course in machine learning log log we can compute z amples and negative examples. in this case f it s weighted error rate will be because it gets every negative example wrong. computing we get log before normalization we get the new weight for each positive example to be exp the weight for each negative example becomes exp therefore after normalization the weight distribution on any single positive example is and the weight on any negative example is however since there are positive examples and negative examples the cumulative weight on all positive examples is the cumulative weight on all negative examples is thus after a single boosting iteration the data has become precisely evenly weighted. this guarantees that in the next iteration our weak learner must do something more interesting than majority voting if it is to achieve an error rate less than as required. one of the major attractions of boosting is that it is perhaps easy to design computationally efficient weak learners. a very popular type of weak learner is a shallow decision tree a decision tree with a small depth limit. figure shows test error rates for decision trees of different maximum depths different curves run for differing numbers of boosting iterations x-axis. as you can see if you are willing to boost for many iterations very shallow trees are quite effective. in fact a very popular weak learner is a decision decision stump a decision tree that can only ask one question. this may seem like a silly model in fact it is on it s own but when combined with boosting it becomes very effective. to understand why suppose for a moment that our data consists only of binary features so that any question that a decision tree might ask is of the form is feature on? by concentrating on decision stumps all weak functions must have the form f where s and d indexes some feature. now consider the final form of a function learned by adaboost. this example uses concrete numbers but the same result holds no matter what the data distribution looks like nor how many examples there are. write out the general case to see that you will still arrive at an even weighting after one iteration. we can expand it as follow where we let fk denote the single feature selected by the kth decision stump and let sk denote its sign f sgn sgn k f fk kskx fk ksk k sgn sgn x b k k k figure perf comparison of depth vs boost why do the functions have this form? ensemble methods algorithm randomforesttraind depth k for k k do tk complete binary tree of depth depth with random feature splits f the function computed by tk with leaves filled in by d end for return f x k f return voted classifier where wd k fkd ksk and b k ksk thus when working with decision stumps adaboost actually provides an algorithm for learning linear classifiers! in fact this connection has recently been strengthened you can show that adaboost provides an algorithm for optimizing exponential loss. this connection is beyond the scope of this book. as a further example consider the case of boosting a linear classifier. in this case if we let the kth weak classifier be parameterized by wk and bk the overall predictor will have the form wk x f sgn k ksgn you can notice that this is nothing but a two-layer neural network with k-many hidden units! of course it s not a classifically trained neural network you learn wk you never go back and update it but the structure is identical. random ensembles one of the most computationally expensive aspects of ensembles of decision trees is training the decision trees. this is very fast for decision stumps but for deeper trees it can be prohibitively expensive. the expensive part is choosing the tree structure. once the tree structure is chosen it is very cheap to fill in the leaves the predictions of the trees using the training data. an efficient and surprisingly effective alternative is to use trees with fixed structures and random features. collections of trees are called forests and so classifiers built like this are called random forests. the random forest training algorithm shown in algorithm is quite short. it takes three arguments the data a desired depth of the decision trees and a number k of total decision trees to build. the algorithm generates each of the k trees independently which makes it very easy to parallelize. for each trees it constructs a full binary tree of depth depth. the features used at the branches of this a course in machine learning tree are selected randomly typically with replacement meaning that the same feature can appear multiple times even in one branch. the leaves of this tree where predictions are made are filled in based on the training data. this last step is the only point at which the training data is used. the resulting classifier is then just a voting of the kmany random trees. the most amazing thing about this approach is that it actually works remarkably well. it tends to work best when all of the features are at least marginally relevant since the number of features selected for any given tree is small. an intuitive reason that it works well is the following. some of the trees will query on useless features. these trees will essentially make random predictions. but some of the trees will happen to query on good features and will make good predictions the leaves are estimated based on the training data. if you have enough trees the random ones will wash out as noise and only the good trees will have an effect on the final classification. exercises exercise todo. efficient learning learning objectives understand and be able to implement stochastic gradient descent algorithms. compare and contrast small versus large batch sizes in stochastic optimization. derive subgradients for sparse regularizers. implement feature hashing. dependencies so far our focus has been on models of learning and basic algorithms for those models. we have not placed much emphasis on how to learn quickly. the basic techniques you learned about so far are enough to get learning algorithms running on tens or hundreds of thousands of examples. but if you want to build an algorithm for web page ranking you will need to deal with millions or billions of examples in hundreds of thousands of dimensions. the basic approaches you have seen so far are insufficient to achieve such a massive scale. in this chapter you will learn some techniques for scaling learning algorithms. this are useful even when you do not have billions of training examples because it s always nice to have a program that runs quickly. you will see techniques for speeding up both model training and model prediction. the focus in this chapter is on linear models simplicity but most of what you will learn applies more generally. what does it mean to be fast? everyone always wants fast algorithms. in the context of machine learning this can mean many things. you might want fast training algorithms or perhaps training algorithms that scale to very large data sets instance ones that will not fit in main memory. you might want training algorithms that can be easily parallelized. or you might not care about training efficiency since it is an offline process and only care about how quickly your learned functions can make classification decisions. it is important to separate out these desires. if you care about efficiency at training time then what you are really asking for are more efficient learning algorithms. on the other hand if you care about efficiency at test time then you are asking for models that can be quickly evaluated. one issue that is not covered in this chapter is parallel learning. a course in machine learning this is largely because it is currently not a well-understood area in machine learning. there are many aspects of parallelism that come into play such as the speed of communication across the network whether you have shared memory etc. right now this the general poor-man s approach to parallelization is to employ ensembles. stochastic optimization during training of most learning algorithms you consider the entire data set simultaneously. this is certainly true of gradient descent algorithms for regularized linear classifiers algorithm in which you first compute a gradient over the entire training data simplicity consider the unbiased case g n w xn w where y is some loss function. then you update the weights by w w g. in this algorithm in order to make a single update you have to look at every training example. when there are billions of training examples it is a bit silly to look at every one before doing anything. perhaps just on the basis of the first few examples you can already start learning something! stochastic optimization involves thinking of your training data as a big distribution over examples. a draw from this distribution corresponds to picking some example at random from your data set. viewed this way the optimization problem becomes a stochastic optimization problem because you are trying to optimize some function a regularized linear classifier over a probability distribution. you can derive this intepretation directly as follows w arg max w arg max w arg max w n n n arg max w e d rw w xn rw w xn n w xn w x n rw n rw definition move r inside sum divide through by n write as expectation where d is the training data distribution given this framework you have the following general form of an efficient learning algorithm stochasticgradientdescentf d s k for k k do initialize variable we are optimizing gk zf dk s-many random data points from d zk compute gradient on sample take a step down the gradient end for return zk optimization problem min e z in the example denotes the random choice of examples over the dataset z denotes the weight vector and f denotes the loss on that example plus a fraction of the regularizer. stochastic optimization problems are formally harder than regular optimization problems because you do not even get access to exact function values and gradients. the only access you have to the function f that you wish to optimize are noisy measurements governed by the distribution over despite this lack of information you can still run a gradient-based algorithm where you simply compute local gradients on a current sample of data. more precisely you can draw a data point at random from your data set. this is analogous to drawing a single value from its distribution. you can compute the gradient of f just at that point. in this case of a regularized linear model this is simply g w x n w where x is the random point you selected. given this estimate of the gradient s an estimate because it s based on a single random draw you can take a small gradient step w w g. this is the stochastic gradient descent algorithm in prac tice taking gradients with respect to a single data point might be too myopic. in such cases it is useful to use a small batch of data. here you can draw random examples from the training data and compute a small gradient based on those examples g n w where you need to include counts of the regularizer. popular batch sizes are points and the generic sgd algorithm is depicted in algorithm which takes k-many steps over batches of s-many examples. w xm in stochastic gradient descent it is imperative to choose good step sizes. it is also very important that the steps get smaller over time at a reasonable slow rate. in particular convergence can be guaranteed for learning rates of the form k where is a fixed initial step size typically or depending on how quickly you ex a course in machine learning pect the algorithm to converge. unfortunately in comparisong to gradient descent stochastic gradient is quite sensitive to the selection of a good learning rate. there is one more practical issues related to the use of sgd as a learning algorithm do you really select a random point subset of random points at each step or do you stream through the data in order. the answer is akin to the answer of the same question for the perceptron algorithm if you do not permute your data at all very bad things can happen. if you do permute your data once and then do multiple passes over that same permutation it will converge but more slowly. in theory you really should permute every iteration. if your data is small enough to fit in memory this is not a big deal you will only pay for cache misses. however if your data is too large for memory and resides on a magnetic disk that has a slow seek time randomly seeking to new data points for each example is prohibitivly slow and you will likely need to forgo permuting the data. the speed hit in convergence speed will almost certainly be recovered by the speed gain in not having to seek on disk routinely. that the story is very different for solid state disks on which random accesses really are quite efficient. sparse regularization for many learning algorithms the test-time efficiency is governed by how many features are used for prediction. this is one reason decision trees tend to be among the fastest predictors they only use a small number of features. especially in cases where the actual computation of these features is expensive cutting down on the number that are used at test time can yield huge gains in efficiency. moreover the amount of memory used to make predictions is also typically governed by the number of features. this is not true of kernel methods like support vector machines in which the dominant cost is the number of support vectors. furthermore you may simply believe that your learning problem can be solved with a very small number of features this is a very reasonable form of inductive bias. this is the idea behind sparse models and in particular sparse regularizers. one of the disadvantages of a regularizer for linear models is that they tend to never produce weights that are exactly zero. they get close to zero but never hit it. to understand why as a weight wd approaches zero its gradient also approaches zero. thus even if the weight should be zero it will essentially never get there because of the constantly shrinking gradient. this suggests that an alternative regularizer is required to yield a sparse inductive bias. an ideal case would be the zero-norm regular efficient learning izer which simply counts the number of non-zero values in a vector dwd if you could minimize this regularizer you would be explicitly minimizing the number of non-zero features. unfortunately not only is the zero-norm non-convex it s also discrete. optimizing it is np-hard. a reasonable middle-ground is the one-norm d it is indeed convex in fact it is the tighest norm that is convex. moreover its gradients do not go to zero as in the two-norm. just as hinge-loss is the tightest convex upper bound on zero-one error the one-norm is the tighest convex upper bound on the zero-norm. at this point you should be content. you can take your subgradient optimizer for arbitrary functions and plug in the one-norm as a regularizer. the one-norm is surely non-differentiable at wd but you can simply choose any value in the range as a subgradient at that point. should choose zero. unfortunately this does not quite work the way you might expect. the issue is that the gradient might overstep zero and you will never end up with a solution that is particularly sparse. for example at the end of one gradient step you might have your gradient might have and your gradient step will update so that the new in the subsequent iteration you might have and step to this observation leads to the idea of trucated gradients. the idea is simple if you have a gradient that would step you over wd then just set wd in the easy case when the learning rate is this means that if the sign of wd gd is different than the sign of wd then you truncate the gradient step and simply set wd in other words gd should never be larger than wd once you incorporate learning rates you can express this as gd gd gd if wd and gd if wd and gd otherwise wd wd this works quite well in the case of subgradient descent. it works somewhat less well in the case of stochastic subgradient descent. the problem that arises in the stochastic case is that wherever you choose to stop optimizing you will have just touched a single example small batch of examples which will increase the weights for a lot of features before the regularizer has time to shrink them back down to zero. you will still end up with somewhat sparse solutions but not as sparse as they could be. there are algorithms for dealing with this situation but they all have a heuristic flavor to them and are beyond the scope of this book. a course in machine learning feature hashing as much as speed is a bottleneck in prediction so often is memory usage. if you have a very large number of features the amount of memory that it takes to store weights for all of them can become prohibitive especially if you wish to run your algorithm on small devices. feature hashing is an incredibly simple technique for reducing the memory footprint of linear models with very small sacrifices in accuracy. the basic idea is to replace all of your features with hashed versions of those features thus reducing your space from d-many feature weights to p-many feature weights where p is the range of the hash function. you can actually think of hashing as a feature mapping rd rp for some p d. the idea is as follows. first you choose a hash function h whose domain is d and whose range is then when you receive a feature vector x rd you map it to a shorter feature vector x rp. algorithmically you can think of this mapping as follows initialize x for each d d hash d to position p hd update the pth position by adding xd xp xp xd return x mathematically the mapping looks like d pxd d h xd where h hd p. in the case where p d and h simply encodes a per mutation then this mapping does not change the learning problem at all. all it does is rename all of the features. in practice p d and there will be collisions. in this context a collision means that two features which are really different end up looking the same to the learning algorithm. for instance is it sunny today? and did my favorite sports team win last night? might get mapped to the same location after hashing. the hope is that the learning algorithm is sufficiently robust to noise that it can handle this case well. consider the kernel defined by this hash mapping. namely khashx z de p p d e h x z d xdze e h pzd d pxd d phe pxdze xdze efficient learning this hash kernel has the form of a linear kernel plus a small number of quadratic terms. the particular quadratic terms are exactly those given by collisions of the hash function. there are two things to notice about this. the first is that collisions might not actually be bad things! in a sense they re giving you a little extra representational power. in particular if the hash function happens to select out feature pairs that benefit from being paired then you now have a better representation. the second is that even if this doesn t happen the quadratic term in the kernel has only a small effect on the overall prediction. in particular if you assume that your hash function is pairwise independent common assumption of hash functions then the expected value of this quadratic term is zero and its variance decreases at a rate of op in other words if you choose p then the variance is on the order of exercises exercise todo. unsupervised learning learning objectives explain the difference between linear and non-linear dimensionality reduction. relate the view of pca as maximiz ing variance with the view of it as minimizing reconstruction error. implement latent semantic analysis for text data. motivate manifold learning from the perspective of reconstruction error. understand k-means clustering as distance minimization. explain the importance of initial ization in k-means and furthest-first heuristic. implement agglomerative clustering. argue whether spectral clustering is a clustering algorithm or a dimensionality reduction algorithm. dependencies if you have access to labeled training data you know what to do. this is the supervised setting in which you have a teacher telling you the right answers. unfortunately finding such a teacher is often difficult expensive or down right impossible. in those cases you might still want to be able to analyze your data even though you do not have labels. unsupervised learning is learning without a teacher. one basic thing that you might want to do with data is to visualize it. sadly it is difficult to visualize things in more than two three dimensions and most data is in hundreds of dimensions more. dimensionality reduction is the problem of taking high dimensional data and embedding it in a lower dimension space. another thing you might want to do is automatically derive a partitioning of the data into clusters. you ve already learned a basic approach for doing this the k-means algorithm here you will analyze this algorithm to see why it works. you will also learn more advanced clustering approaches. k-means clustering revisited the k-means clustering algorithm is re-presented in algorithm there are two very basic questions about this algorithm does it converge if so how quickly how sensitive it is to initialization? the answers to these questions detailed below are yes it converges and it converges very quickly in practice slowly in theory yes it is sensitive to initialization but there are good ways to initialize it. consider the question of convergence. the following theorem states that the k-means algorithm converges though it does not say how quickly it happens. the method of proving the convergence is to specify a clustering quality objective function and then to show that the k-means algorithm converges to a optimum of that objective function. the particular objective function that k-means algorithm k-meansd k for k to k do k some random location end for repeat for n to n do zn argmink k xn end for for k to k do k mean xn zn k end for until converged return z unsupervised learning randomly initialize mean for kth cluster assign example n to closest center re-estimate mean of cluster k return cluster assignments is optimizing is the sum of squared distances from any data point to its assigned center. this is a natural generalization of the definition of a mean the mean of a set of points is the single point that minimizes the sum of squared distances from the mean to every point in the data. formally the k-means objective is k zn lz d n nznk theorem convergence theorem. for any dataset d and any number of clusters k the k-means algorithm converges in a finite number of iterations where convergence is measured by l ceasing the change. proof of theorem the proof works as follows. there are only two points in which the k-means algorithm changes the values of or z lines and we will show that both of these operations can never increase the value of l. assuming this is true the rest of the argument is as follows. after the first pass through the data there are are only finitely many possible assignments to z and because z is discrete and because can only take on a finite number of values means of some subset of the data. furthermore l is lower-bounded by zero. together this means that l cannot decrease more than a finite number of times. thus it must stop decreasing at some point and at that point the algorithm has converged. it remains to show that lines and decrease l. for line when looking at example n suppose that the previous value of zn is a and the new value is b. it must be the case that b b. thus changing from a to b can only decrease l. for line consider the second form of l. line computes k as the mean of the data points for which zn k which is precisely the point that minimizes squared sitances. thus this update to k can only decrease l. there are several aspects of k-means that are unfortunate. first the convergence is only to a local optimum of l. in practice this a course in machine learning means that you should usually run it times with different initializations and pick the one with minimal resulting l. second one can show that there are input datasets and initializations on which it might take an exponential amount of time to converge. fortunately these cases almost never happen in practice and in fact it has recently been shown that if you limit the floating point precision of your machine k-means will converge in polynomial time still only to a local optimum using techniques of smoothed analysis. the biggest practical issue in k-means is initialization. if the cluster means are initialized poorly you often get convergence to uninteresting solutions. a useful heuristic is the furthest-first heuristic. this gives a way to perform a semi-random initialization that attempts to pick initial means as far from each other as possible. the heuristic is sketched below pick a random example m and set xm. for k k find the example m that is as far as possible from all previ ously selected means namely m arg maxm and set k xm in this heuristic the only bit of randomness is the selection of the first data point. after that it is completely deterministic in the rare case that there are multiple equidistant points in step it is extremely important that when selecting the mean you select that point that maximizes the minimum distance to the closest other mean. you want the point that s as far away from all previous means as possible. the furthest-first heuristic is just that a heuristic. it works very well in practice though can be somewhat sensitive to outliers will often get selected as some of the initial means. however this outlier sensitivity is usually reduced after one iteration through the k-means algorithm. despite being just a heuristic it is quite useful in practice. you can turn the heuristic into an algorithm by adding a bit more randomness. this is the idea of the k-means algorithm which is a simple randomized tweak on the furthest-first heuristic. the idea is that when you select the kth mean instead of choosing the absolute furthest data point you choose a data point at random with probability proportional to its distance squared. this is made formal in algorithm if you use k-means as an initialization for k-means then you are able to achieve an approximation guarantee on the final value unsupervised learning algorithm k-meansd k xm for m chosen uniformly at random randomly initialize first point for k to k do compute distances normalize to probability distribution pick an example at random dn n p n nd m random sample from p k xm d end for run k-means using as initial centers of the objective. this doesn t tell you that you will reach the global optimum but it does tell you that you will get reasonably close. in particular if l is the value obtained by running k-means then this will not be too far from lopt the true global minimum. theorem approximation guarantee. the expected value of the objective returned by k-means is never more than olog k from optimal and can be as close as from optimal. even in the former case with random restarts one restart will be from optimal high probability. formally k moreover if the data is well suited for clustering then the notion of well suited for clustering informally states that the advantage of going from k clusters to k clusters is large. formally it means that lk is the optimal value for clustering with k clusters and is the desired degree of approximation. the idea is that if this condition does not hold then you shouldn t bother clustering the data. where lk one of the biggest practical issues with k-means clustering is choosing k. namely if someone just hands you a dataset and asks you to cluster it how many clusters should you produce? this is difficult because increasing k will always decrease lk k n and so simply using l as a notion of goodness is insufficient to overfitting in a supervised setting. a number of information criteria have been proposed to try to address this problem. they all effectively boil down to regularizing k so that the model cannot grow to be too complicated. the two most popular are the bayes information criteria and the akaike information criteria defined below in the context of k-means bic aic arg min k arg min k lk k log d lk the informal intuition behind these criteria is that increasing k is going to make lk go down. however if it doesn t go down by enough then it s not worth doing. in the case of bic by enough a course in machine learning means by an amount proportional to log d in the case of aic it s proportional to thus aic provides a much stronger penalty for many clusters than does bic especially in high dimensions. a more formal intuition for bic is the following. you ask yourself the question if i wanted to send this data across a network how many bits would i need to send? clearly you could simply send all of the n examples each of which would take roughly log d bits to send. this gives n log d to send all the data. alternatively you could first cluster the data and send the cluster centers. this will take k log d bits. then for each data point you send its center as well as its deviation from that center. it turns out this will cost exactly lk bits. therefore the bic is precisely measuring how many bits it will take to send your data using k clusters. the k that minimizes this number of bits is the optimal value. linear dimensionality reduction dimensionality reduction is the task of taking a dataset in high dimensions and reducing it to low dimensions while retaining the important characteristics of the data. since this is an unsupervised setting the notion of important characteristics is difficult to define. consider the dataset in figure which lives in high dimensions and you want to reduce to low dimensions in the case of linear dimensionality reduction the only thing you can do is to project the data onto a vector and use the projected distances as the embeddings. figure shows a projection of this data onto the vector that points in the direction of maximal variance of the original dataset. intuitively this is a reasonable notion of importance since this is the direction in which most information is encoded in the data. for the rest of this section assume that the data is centered namely the mean of all the data is at the origin. will simply make the math easier. suppose the two dimensional data is xn and you re looking for a vector u that points in the direction of maximal variance. you can compute this by projecting each point onto u and looking at the variance of the result. in order for the projection to make sense you need to constrain in this case the projections are u xn u call these values pn. the goal is to compute the variance of the and then choose u to maximize this variance. to compute the variance you first need to compute the mean. because the mean of the xns was zero the math review eigenvalues and eigenvectors the usual... unsupervised learning figure mean of the ps is also zero. this can be seen as follows n pn n xn u n xn u u the variance of the is then just n n. finding the optimal u the perspective of variance maximization reduces to the following optimization problem max u n subj. to in this problem it becomes apparent why keeping u unit length is important if not u would simply stretch to have infinite length to maximize the objective. it is now helpful to write the collection of datapoints xn as a n d matrix x. if you take this matrix x and multiply it by u which has dimensions d you end up with a n vector whose values are exactly the values p. the objective in eq is then just the squared norm of p. this simplifies eq to subj. to max u where the constraint has been rewritten to make it amenable to constructing the lagrangian. doing so and taking gradients yields lu ul u u u you can solve this expression u by computing the first eigenvector and eigenvalue of the matrix this gives you the solution to a projection into a one-dimensional space. to get a second dimension you want to find a new vector v on which the data has maximal variance. however to avoid redundancy you want v to be orthogonal to u namely u v this gives subj. to and u v max v following the same procedure as before you can construct a la a course in machine learning algorithm pcad k meanx x d x k uk top k eigenvalueseigenvectors of d return u compute data mean for centering compute covariance is a vector of ones grangian and differentiate lv ul v v project data using u however you know that u is the first eigenvector of so the solution to this problem for and v is given by the second eigenvalueeigenvector pair of repeating this analysis inductively tells you that if you want to project onto k mutually orthogonal dimensions you simply need to take the first k eigenvectors of the matrix this matrix is often called the data covariance matrix because n m xnixmj which is the sample covariance between features i and j. this leads to the technique of principle components analysis or pca. for completeness the is depicted in algorithm the important thing to note is that the eigenanalysis only gives you the projection directions. it does not give you the embedded data. to embed a data point x you need to compute its embedding as x x if you write u for the d k matrix of us then this is just xu. there is an alternative derivation of pca that can be informative based on reconstruction error. consider the one-dimensional case again where you are looking for a single projection direction u. if you were to use this direction your projected data would be z xu. each zn gives the position of the nth datapoint along u. you can project this one-dimensional data back into the original space by multiplying it by this gives you reconstructed values instead of maximizing variance you might instead want to minimize the reconstruction error defined by definition of z quadratic rule unsupervised learning quadratic rule u is a unit vector c join constants rewrite last term minimizing this final term is equivalent to maximizing which is exactly the form of the maximum variance derivation of pca. thus you can see that maximizing variance is identical to minimizing reconstruction error. the same question of what should k be arises in dimensionality reduction as in clustering. if the purpose of dimensionality reduction is to visualize then k should be or however an alternative purpose of dimensionality reduction is to avoid the curse of dimensionality. for instance even if you have labeled data it might be worthwhile to reduce the dimensionality before applying supervised learning essentially as a form of regularization. in this case the question of an optimal k comes up again. in this case the same criteria and bic that can be used for clustering can be used for pca. the only difference is the quality measure changes from a sum of squared distances to means clustering to a sum of squared distances to original data points pca. in particular for bic you get the reconstruction error plus k log d for aic you get the reconstruction error plus manifolds and graphs what is a manifold? graph construction non-linear dimensionality reduction isomap lle mvu mds? non-linear clustering spectral methods what is a spectrum spectral clustering a course in machine learning exercises exercise todo. expectation maximization learning objectives explain the relationship between parameters and hidden variables. construct generative stories for clustering and dimensionality reduction. draw a graph explaining how em works by constructing convex lower bounds. implement em for clustering with mixtures of gaussians and contrasting it with k-means. evaluate the differences betweem em and gradient descent for hidden variable models. dependencies suppose you were building a naive bayes model for a text categorization problem. after you were done your boss told you that it became prohibitively expensive to obtain labeled data. you now have a probabilistic model that assumes access to labels but you don t have any labels! can you still do something? amazingly you can. you can treat the labels as hidden variables and attempt to learn them at the same time as you learn the parameters of your model. a very broad family of algorithms for solving problems just like this is the expectation maximization family. in this chapter you will derive expectation maximization algorithms for clustering and dimensionality reduction and then see why em works. clustering with a mixture of gaussians in chapter you learned about probabilitic models for classification based on density estimation. let s start with a fairly simple classification model that assumes we have labeled data. we will shortly remove this assumption. our model will state that we have k classes and data from class k is drawn from a gaussian with mean k and variance k the choice of classes is parameterized by the generative story for this model is for each example n n choose a label yn disc choose example xn nor yn yn this generative story can be directly translated into a likelihood as before pd n multyn yn yn a course in machine learning n choose label yn for each example d exp yn choose feature values yn if you had access to labels this would be all well and good and you could obtain closed form solutions for the maximum likelihood estimates of all parameters by taking a log and then taking gradients of the log likelihood k fraction of training examples in class k n n k k mean of training examples in class k nyn kxn nyn k k variance of training examples in class k nyn k k nyn k you should be able to derive the maximum likelihood solution results formally by now. suppose that you don t have labels. analogously to the k-means algorithm one potential solution is to iterate. you can start off with guesses for the values of the unknown variables and then iteratively improve them over time. in k-means the approach was the assign examples to labels clusters. this time instead of making hard assignments example belongs to cluster we ll make soft assignments example belongs half to cluster a quarter to cluster and a quarter to cluster so as not to confuse ourselves too much we ll introduce a new variable zn znk sums to one to denote a fractional assignment of examples to clusters. this notion of soft-assignments is visualized in figure here we ve depicted each example as a pie chart and it s coloring denotes the degree to which it s been assigned to each three clusters. the size of the pie pieces correspond to the zn values. formally znk denotes the probability that example n is assigned to cluster k znk pyn k xn pyn k xn zn pxn multk k k figure empiecharts a figure showing pie charts here the normalizer zn is to ensure that zn sums to one. given a set of parameters s s and the fractional assignments znk are easy to compute. now akin to k-means given algorithm gmmx k expectation maximization randomly initialize mean for kth cluster initialize variances each cluster equally likely a priori for k to k do k some random location k k end for repeat for n to n do d for k to k do znk k fractional assignments exp k k end for zn k znk zn end for for k to k do k n n znk k n znkxn n znk k n znkxn k n znk end for until converged return z compute normalize fractional assignments re-estimate prior probability of cluster k re-estimate mean of cluster k re-estimate variance of cluster k return cluster assignments fractional assignments you need to recompute estimates of the model parameters. in analogy to the maximum likelihood solution you can do this by counting fractional points rather than full points. this gives the following re-estimation updates k fraction of training examples in class k n n znk k mean of fractional examples in class k n znkxn n znk k variance of fractional examples in class k n znk k n znk all that has happened here is that the hard assignments k have been replaced with soft assignments znk as a bit of foreshadowing of what is to come what we ve done is essentially replace known labels with expected labels hence the name expectation maximization. putting this together yields algorithm this is the gmm gaussian mixture models algorithm because the probabilitic model being learned describes a dataset as being drawn from a mixture distribution where each component of this distribution is a a course in machine learning gaussian. just as in the k-means algorithm this approach is succeptible to local optima and quality of initialization. the heuristics for computing better initializers for k-means are also useful here. aside from the fact that gmms use soft assignments and k-means uses hard assignments there are other differences between the two approaches. what are they? the expectation maximization framework figure emlowerbound a figure showing successive lower bounds at this point you ve seen a method for learning in a particular probabilistic model with hidden variables. two questions remain can you apply this idea more generally and why is it even a reasonable thing to do? expectation maximization is a family of algorithms for performing maximum likelihood estimation in probabilistic models with hidden variables. the general flavor of how we will proceed is as follows. we want to maximize the log likelihood l but this will turn out to be difficult to do directly. instead we ll pick a surrogate function l that s a lower bound on l l l everywhere that s easier to maximize. we ll construct the surrogate in such a way that increasing it will force the true likelihood to also go up. after maximizing l we ll construct a new lower bound and optimize that. this process is shown pictorially in figure to proceed consider an arbitrary probabilistic model px y where x denotes the observed data y denotes the hidden data and denotes the parameters. in the case of gaussian mixture models x was the data points y was the labels and included the cluster prior probabilities the cluster means and the cluster variances. now given access only to a number of examples xn you would like to estimate the parameters of the model. probabilistically this means that some of the variables are unknown and therefore you need to marginalize sum over their possible values. now your data consists only of x not the y pairs in d. you can then write the likelihood as px yn px yn yn n pxn yn n yn pxn yn marginalization examples are independent algebra at this point the natural thing to do is to take logs and then start taking gradients. however once you start taking logs you run into a problem the log cannot eat the sum! pxn yn lx n log yn expectation maximization the next step is to apply the somewhat strange but strangely namely the log gets stuck outside the sum and cannot move in to decompose the rest of the likelihood term! useful trick of multiplying by in particular let q be an arbitrary probability distribution. we will multiply the p. term above by qynqyn a valid step so long as q is never zero. this leads to lx n log yn qyn pxn yn qyn we will now construct a lower bound using jensen s inequality. this is a very useful easy to prove! result that states that f i ixi i i f so long as i for all i i i and f is concave. if this looks familiar that s just because it s a direct result of the definition of concavity. recall that f is concave if f by a f b f whenever a b you can now apply jensen s inequality to the log likelihood by identifying the list of qyns as the s log as f is indeed concave and each x as the pq term. this yields prove jensen s inequality using the definition of concavity and induction. pxn yn lx n n lx yn yn qyn log qyn log pxn yn qyn log qyn qyn note that this inequality holds for any choice of function q so long as its non-negative and sums to one. in particular it needn t even by the same function q for each n. we will need to take advantage of both of these properties. we have succeeded in our first goal constructing a lower bound on l. when you go to optimize this lower bound for the only part that matters is the first term. the second term q log q drops out as a function of this means that the the maximization you need to be able to compute for fixed qns is arg max n yn qnyn log pxn yn this is exactly the sort of maximization done for gaussian mixture models when we recomputed new means variances and cluster prior probabilities. a course in machine learning the second question is what should qn actually be? any rea sonable q will lead to a lower bound so in order to choose one q over another we need another criterion. recall that we are hoping to maximize l by instead maximizing a lower bound. in order to ensure that an increase in the lower bound implies an increase in l we need to ensure that lx lx in words l should be a lower bound on l that makes contact at the current point this is shown in figure including a case where the lower bound does not make contact and thereby does not guarantee an increase in l with an increase in l. em versus gradient descent computing gradients through marginals step size dimensionality reduction with probabilistic pca derivation advantages over pca exercises exercise todo. semi-supervised learning you may find yourself in a setting where you have access to some labeled data and some unlabeled data. you would like to use the labeled data to learn a classifier but it seems wasteful to throw out all that unlabeled data. the key question is what can you do with that unlabeled data to aid learning? and what assumptions do we have to make in order for this to be helpful? one idea is to try to use the unlabeled data to learn a better decision boundary. in a discriminative setting you can accomplish this by trying to find decision boundaries that don t pass too closely to unlabeled data. in a generative setting you can simply treat some of the labels as observed and some as hidden. this is semi-supervised learning. an alternative idea is to spend a small amount of money to get labels for some subset of the unlabeled data. however you would like to get the most out of your money so you would only like to pay for labels that are useful. this is active learning. learning objectives explain the cluster assumption for semi-supervised discriminative learning and why it is necessary. dervive an em algorithm for generative semi-supervised text categorization. compare and contrast the query by uncertainty and query by committee heuristics for active learning. dependencies em for semi-supervised learning naive bayes model graph-based semi-supervised learning key assumption graphs and manifolds label prop loss-based semi-supervised learning density assumption loss function non-convex a course in machine learning active learning motivation qbc qbu dangers of semi-supervised learing unlab overwhelms lab biased data from active exercises exercise todo. exercises exercise todo. graphical models learning objectives foo dependencies none. online learning learning objectives explain the experts model and why it is hard even to compete with the single best expert. define what it means for an online learning algorithm to have no regret. implement the follow-the-leader algorithm. categorize online learning algo rithms in terms of how they measure changes in parameters and how they measure error. dependencies all of the learning algorithms that you know about at this point are based on the idea of training a model on some data and evaluating it on other data. this is the batch learning model. however you may find yourself in a situation where students are constantly rating courses and also constantly asking for recommendations. online learning focuses on learning over a stream of data on which you have to make predictions continually. you have actually already seen an example of an online learning algorithm the perceptron. however our use of the perceptron and our analysis of its performance have both been in a batch setting. in this chapter you will see a formalization of online learning differs from the batch learning formalization and several algorithms for online learning with different properties. online learning framework regret follow the leader agnostic learning algorithm versus problem learning with features change but not too much littlestone analysis for gd and egd passive agressive learning pa algorithm online analysis online learning learning with lots of irrelevant features winnow relationship to egd exercises exercise todo. structured learning tasks learning objectives todo. hidden markov models viterbi hidden markov models forward-backward maximum entropy markov models structured perceptronn conditional random fields exercises exercise todo. dependencies exercises exercise todo. bayesian learning learning objectives todo. dependencies code and datasets rating easy? ai? sys? thy? morning? y y n n n y y n n y n y y n n y n n y y y y y n y y y y n n y y y n n n n y n n n n n n y n n n n n n y y y y y y y y y y y n y n n y y n y y y n y n n y n n n n n n n y n n n y y n y y n y y n y n y notation bibliography sergey brin. near neighbor search in large metric spaces. in conference on very large databases tom m. mitchell. machine learning. mcgraw hill frank rosenblatt. the perceptron a probabilistic model for information storage and organization in the brain. psychological review reprinted in neurocomputing press index k-nearest neighbors p-norms loss absolute loss activation function activations active learning adaboost algorithm all pairs all versus all architecture selection area under the curve auc ava averaged perceptron back-propagation bag of words bagging base learner batch batch learning bayes error rate bayes optimal classifier bayes optimal error rate bernouilli distribution bias binary features bipartite ranking problems boosting bootstrap resampling bootstrapping categorical features chain rule chord circuit complexity clustering clustering quality collective classification complexity concave concavity concept confidence intervals constrained optimization problem contour convergence rate convex cross validation cubic feature map curvature data covariance matrix data generating distribution decision boundary decision stump decision tree decision trees development data dimensionality reduction discrete distribution distance dominates dot product dual problem dual variables early stopping embedding ensemble error driven error rate euclidean distance evidence example normalization examples expectation maximization expected loss exponential loss feasible region feature combinations feature mapping feature normalization feature scale feature space feature values feature vector features forward-propagation fractional assignments furthest-first heuristic gaussian distribution gaussian kernel gaussian mixture models generalize generative story geometric view global minimum gmm gradient gradient ascent gradient descent graph hard-margin svm hash kernel held-out data hidden units hidden variables hinge loss histogram a course in machine learning hyperbolic tangent hypercube hyperparameter hyperplane hyperspheres hypothesis hypothesis class hypothesis testing i.i.d. assumption imbalanced data importance weight independently independently and identically dis tributed indicator function induce induced distribution induction inductive bias iteration jack-knifing jensen s inequality joint k-nearest neighbors karush-kuhn-tucker conditions kernel kernel trick kernels kkt conditions label lagrange multipliers lagrange variable lagrangian layer-wise leave-one-out cross validation level-set license likelihood linear classifier linear classifiers linear decision boundary linear regression linearly separable link function log likelihood log posterior log probability log-likelihood ratio logarithmic transformation logistic loss logistic regression loo cross validation loss function margin margin of a data set marginal likelihood maximum a posteriori maximum depth maximum likelihood estimation mercer s condition model modeling multi-layer network naive bayes assumption nearest neighbor neural network neural networks neurons noise non-convex non-linear normal distribution normalize null hypothesis objective function one versus all one versus rest online online learning optimization problem output unit ova overfitting oversample p-value pac paired t-test parametric test parity function patch representation pca perceptron perpendicular pixel representation polynomial kernels positive semi-definite posterior precision precisionrecall curves predict preference function primal variables principle components analysis prior probabilistic modeling probably approximately correct projected gradient psd radial basis function random forests rbf kernel rbf network recall receiver operating characteristic reconstruction error reductions redundant features regularized objective regularizer representer theorem roc curve sample complexity semi-supervised learning sensitivity separating hyperplane sgd shallow decision tree shape representation sigmoid sigmoid function sigmoid network sign single-layer network slack slack parameters smoothed analysis soft assignments soft-margin svm span sparse specificity squared loss stacking stacktest statistical inference statistically significant stochastic gradient descent stochastic optimization strong learner strong learning algorithm strongly convex structural risk minimization sub-sampling subderivative subgradient subgradient descent support vector machine support vectors surrogate loss symmetric modes t-test test data test error test set text categorization the curse of dimensionality threshold tikhonov regularization training data training error trucated gradients two-layer network unbiased underfitting unit hypercube unsupervised learning index validation data vapnik-chernovenkis dimension variance vc dimension vector visualize vote voted perceptron voting weak learner weak learning algorithm weighted nearest neighbors weights zeroone loss